SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT STUDIES
UNIT – 1 – INSURANCE MANAGEMENT– SBAA1505
UNIT1- CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK
Concept - Perils And Risks, Classification Of Risks - Need For Insurance - Nature 
And Working Of Insurance, Types , Importance - Role Of Insurance - Fundamental 
Principles Of Insurance - Differentiation Insurance And Guarantee - Insurance 
And Wager - Disclosure - Moral Hazards.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Definition Peril: Peril is an insurance term for an event that could cause damage to property, 
items, or belongings insured. Examples of different perils in home insurance are fire, hail 
damage, flooding, earthquake, and theft, etc. Home Insurance policies are typically divided into 
‘All Peril’ and ‘Named Perils’ insurance policies. These may have different costs and cover 
different risks.
Meaning of Risk:
In simple words risk is danger, peril, hazard, chance of loss, amount covered by insurance, 
person or object insured. The risk is an event or happening which is not planned but eventually 
happens with financial consequences resulting in loss. There is saying higher the risk more the 
profit.
3 Types of Risk in Insurance are
Financial and Non-Financial Risks, measured in monetary terms. 
Pure risks are a loss only or at best a break-even situation.
Fundamental risks are the risks mostly emanating from nature.
It is required to know the complex classification and sub-classification of risk and also an insight 
into risks that can be insured and which cannot be.
We may look into this subject in the following manner:
Financial and Non-Financial Risks.
1. Pure and Speculative Risks.
2. Fundamental and Particular Risks.
In this post, we are going to look into the three classifications of risk.
Financial and Non-Financial Risks
Financial risks are the risks where the outcome of an event (i.e. event giving birth to a loss) can 
be measured in monetary terms. The losses can be assessed and a proper money value can be 
given to those losses. The common examples are:
 Material damage to property arising out of an event. We may consider the damage to a ship due 
to a cyclone or even sinking of a ship due to the cyclone. Damage to the motor car due to aroad 
accident which may be of partial or total nature. Damage to stock or machinery etc.
 Theft of a property which may be a motorcycle, motor car, machinery, items of household use or 
even cash.
 Loss of profit of a business due to fire damages the material property.
 Personal injuries due to the industrial, road or other accidents resulting in medical costs,Court 
awards, etc.
 Death of a breadwinner in a family leading to corresponding financial hardship.
All such losses, i.e. the outcome of unforeseen untoward events can be measured in monetary 
terms.
The losses can be replaced, reinstated or repaired or even a corresponding reasonable financial 
support (in case of death) can be thought about.
We would call all such financial risks as insurable risks and these are indeed the main subjects of 
insurance.
Non-Financial risks are the risks the outcome of which cannot be measured in monetary terms.
There may be a wrong choice or a wrong decision giving rise to possible discomfort or disliking 
or embarrassment but not being capable of valuation in money terms.
Examples can be:
 Choice of a car, its brand, color, etc.
 Selection of a restaurant menu,
 Career selection, whether to be a doctor or engineer etc.
 Choice of bride/bridegroom,
 Choice of publicity etc.
Since the outcome cannot be valued in terms of money, we shall call these non-financial risks as 
uninsurable.
Pure Risk and Speculative Risks
Pure risks are those risks where the outcome shall result in loss only or at best a break-even 
situation. We cannot think about a gain-gain situation.
The result is always unfavorable, or maybe the same situation (as existed before the event) has 
remained without giving birth to a profit (or loss).
As opposed to this, speculative risks are those risks where there is the possibility of gain or 
profit. At least the intent is to make a profit and no loss (although loss might ensue).
Investing in shares may be a good example. Pricing, marketing, forecasting, credit sale, etc. are 
yet examples falling within the domain of speculation.
Consider another example where we can have the existence of both pure risks and speculative 
risks. A garment factory may be in our minds. Here we have:
 Cyclone damage possibility to the factory building,
 Fire damage possibility to stock,
 Machinery breakdown possibility to Machinery,
 Theft possibility to removable items,
 Personal accident possibility of factory workers etc.
Also, we have:
 the question of pricing of the product to remain in the competitive market,
 the question of fashion changes leading to a drastic fall in the demand of the product,
 the question of withdrawal of quota system,
 the question of credit sale
The students should appreciate that in the first set of examples we are indeed talking about the 
possibility of certain losses emanating from certain untoward events or unforeseen contingencies 
(like a cyclone, fire, theft, accident, etc.) and for convenience we shall call them the risks of 
trade.
These are identified as pure risks and as such insurable. Notice that these losses can also be 
measured in monetary terms.
As opposed to this, if we refer to the second set of examples we notice that the outcome of the 
trade or business is not the result of pure risks but indeed the result of economic factors, supply 
& demand, change of fashion, trade restriction or liberalization, etc. and for convenience we call 
them trade risks.
These may be identified as speculative risks and usually not insurable.
Fundamental Risk and Particular Risks
Now coming to the last stage of classification of risk we may consider the subject from the 
viewpoint of the cause of risk and its effect. We call such classifications as fundamental risks 
and particular risks.
Fundamental risks are the risks mostly emanating from nature. These are the risks that arise from 
causes that are beyond the control of an individual or group of individuals.
The losses arising out of such causes may be catastrophic in dimension and felt by a huge 
number of populations, the society or by the state although an individual may be a part of that 
catastrophe. The common examples are:
 Flood & Cyclone, Subsidence & landslip,
 Earthquake & volcanic eruption, Tsunami,
 The convulsion of nature and other natural disasters,
 Famine, Draught
We may also add in the list perils like war, terrorism, riots & other political activities which are 
neither created by nature nor by an individual but resulting in colossal losses.
But one thing is certain which are this that all such perils are impersonal not being caused or 
contributed by an individual or even a group of individuals.
Normally fundamental risks were not supposed to be insurable because of the magnitude and 
these were considered to be the responsibility of State. Now because ofdemand and insurers’ 
strength, these risks are easily insurable.
Particular risks are; as opposed to what has been narrated hereinbefore, there are risks which 
usually arise from actions of individuals or even group of individuals.
These may be identified as causes arising from personal (or group) behavior and effects(losses) 
not being of that magnitude.
These are mostly men created because of their negligence, error in judgment, carelessness, and 
disregard for law or respect.
We may even go onto suggesting that these are indeed the cases (both cause and effect) where 
there has been an omission to do something which should have been done or there has been done 
something which should not have been done.
We may call these as risks of personal nature. The common examples are:
 Fire, Explosion,
 Burglary, housebreaking, larceny, and theft,
 Stranding, Sinking, Capsizing, Collision in case of a ship, including cargo loss,
 Machinery breakdown and deterioration of stock due to machinery breakdown,
 Motor accidents including death and bodily injuries, Industrial accidents,
 The collapse of bridges, Derailments.
Particular risks are insurable risks and most of the insurances relate to these risks.
HISTORY/ORIGIN OF INSURANCE
The idea of insurance took birth thousands of years ago. Yet, the business of insurance, as we 
know it today, goes back to just two or three centuries. Insurance has been known to exist in 
some form or other since 3000 BC. Various civilizations, over the years, have practiced the 
concept of pooling and dividing among themselves, all the losses suffered by some members of 
the community. Insurance through the ages - The Babylonian traders had agreements where they 
would pay additional sums to lenders, as a price for writing off the loans, in case a shipment was 
lost or stolen. These were called “bottomry loans”. Similar practices were prevalent among the 
traders from Baruch and Surat sailing in Indian ships to Sri Lanka, Egypt and Greece. The 
Greeks had started benevolent societies in the late 7th century AD, to take care of the funeral –
and families – of members who died. The Friendly societies of England were similarly 
constituted. • The inhabitants of Rhodes adopted a practice whereby, if some goods were lost due 
to jettisoning during distress, the owners of goods (even those who lost nothing) would bear the 
losses in proportion. Chinese traders in ancient days would keep their goods in different boats or 
ships sailing over the treacherous rivers. They assumed that if one of the boats suffered such a 
fate, the loss of goods would be only partial and not total. The loss could be distributed and 
thereby reduced. • “The Great Fire of London” in 1666, in which more than 13000 houses were 
lost, gave a boost to insurance and the first fire insurance company, called the Fire Office, was 
started in 1680. • Lloyds: The origins of insurance business as practiced today, is traced to the 
Lloyd’s Coffee House in London. Traders, who used to gather there, would agree to share the 
losses to their goods being carried by ships, due to perils of the sea. (maritime perils, such as 
pirates who robbed on the high seas or bad sea weather spoiling the goods or sinking of the ship 
due to perils of the sea.) In India, insurance has a deep-rooted history. It finds mention in the 
writings of Manu ( Manusmrithi ), Yagnavalkya ( Dharmasastra ) and Kautilya ( Arthasastra ). 
The writings talk in terms of pooling of resources that could be re-distributed in times of
calamities such as fire, floods, epidemics and famine. This was probably a pre-cursor to modern 
day insurance. Ancient Indian history has preserved the earliest traces of insurance in the form of 
marine trade loans and carriers’ contracts. Insurance in India has evolved over time heavily 
drawing from other countries, England in particular.
EVOLUTION OF INSURANCE IN MODERN INDIA
 1818 saw the advent of life insurance business in India with the establishment of the Oriental 
Life Insurance Company in Calcutta. This Company however failed in 1834.
 In 1829, the Madras Equitable had begun transacting life insurance business in the Madras 
Presidency.
 1870 saw the enactment of the British Insurance Act and in the last three decades of the 
nineteenth century, the Bombay Mutual (1871), Oriental (1874) and Empire of India (1897) were 
started in the Bombay Residency. This era, however, was dominated by foreign insurance offices 
which did good business in India, namely Albert Life Assurance, Royal Insurance, Liverpool and 
London Globe Insurance and the Indian offices were up for hard competition from the foreign 
companies.
 In 1914, the Government of India started publishing returns of Insurance Companies in India. 
The Indian Life Assurance Companies Act, 1912 was the first statutory measure to regulate life 
business.
 In 1928, the Indian Insurance Companies Act was enacted to enable the Government to collect 
statistical information about both life and non-life business transacted in India by Indian and 
foreign insurers including provident insurance societies.
 In 1938, with a view to protecting the interest of the Insurance public, the earlier legislation 
was consolidated and amended by the Insurance Act, 1938 with comprehensive provisions for 
effective control over the activities of insurers.
 The Insurance Amendment Act of 1950 abolished Principal Agencies. However, there were a 
large number of insurance companies and the level of competition was high. There were also
allegations of unfair trade practices. The Government of India, therefore, decided to nationalize 
insurance business.
 An Ordinance was issued on 19th January, 1956 nationalizing the Life Insurance sector and 
Life Insurance Corporation came into existence in the same year. The LIC absorbed 154 Indian, 
16 non-Indian insurers as also 75 provident societies—245 Indian and foreign insurers in all. The 
LIC had monopoly till the late 90s when the Insurance sector was reopened to the private sector.
 The history of general insurance dates back to the Industrial Revolution in the west and the 
consequent growth of sea-faring trade and commerce in the 17th century. It came to India as a 
legacy of British occupation. General Insurance in India has its roots in the establishment of 
Triton Insurance Company Ltd., in the year 1850 in Calcutta by the British. In 1907, the Indian 
Mercantile Insurance Ltd, was set up. This was the first company to transact all classes of 
general insurance business.
 1957 saw the formation of the General Insurance Council, a wing of the Insurance Association 
of India. The General Insurance Council framed a code of conduct for ensuring fair conduct and 
sound business practices.
 In 1968, the Insurance Act was amended to regulate investments and set minimum solvency 
margins. The Tariff Advisory Committee was also set up then.
 In 1972 with the passing of the General Insurance Business (Nationalization) Act, general 
insurance business was nationalized with effect from 1 st January, 1973. 107 insurers were 
amalgamated and grouped into four companies, namely National Insurance Company Ltd., the 
New India Assurance Company Ltd., the Oriental Insurance Company Ltd and the United India 
Insurance Company Ltd. The General Insurance Corporation of India was incorporated as a 
company in 1971 and it commence business on January 1sst 1973.
 This millennium has seen insurance come a full circle in a journey extending to nearly 200 
years. The process of re-opening of the sector had begun in the early 1990s and the last decade 
and more has seen it been opened up substantially. In 1993, the Government set up a committee 
under the chairmanship of RN Malhotra, former Governor of RBI, to propose recommendations 
for reforms in the insurance sector.
 The objective was to complement the reforms initiated in the financial sector. The committee 
submitted its report in 1994 wherein, among other things, it recommended that the private sector 
be permitted to enter the insurance industry. They stated that foreign companies be allowed to 
enter by floating Indian companies, preferably a joint venture with Indian partners.
 Following the recommendations of the Malhotra Committee report, in 1999, the Insurance 
Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA) was constituted as an autonomous body to 
regulate and develop the insurance industry. The IRDA was incorporated as a statutory body in 
April, 2000. The key objectives of the IRDA include promotion of competition so as to enhance 
customer satisfaction through increased consumer choice and lower premiums, while ensuring 
the financial security of the insurance market.
 The IRDA opened up the market in August 2000 with the invitation for application for 
registrations. Foreign companies were allowed ownership of up to 26%. The Authority has the 
power to frame regulations under Section 114A of the Insurance Act, 1938 and has from 2000 
onwards framed various regulations ranging from registration of companies for carrying on 
insurance business to protection of policyholders’ interests.
 In December, 2000, the subsidiaries of the General Insurance Corporation of India were 
restructured as independent companies and at the same time GIC was converted into a national 
re-insurer. Parliament passed a bill de-linking the four subsidiaries from GIC in July, 2002.
 2003: Introduction of Broker in Indian Insurance market.
 Then Insurance industry transformed into monopoly and Oligopolistic state or public sector 
insurance industry in India.
 Today there are 31 general insurance companies including the ECGC and Agriculture 
Insurance Corporation of India and 24 life insurance companies operating in the country.
 The insurance sector is a colossal one and is growing at a speedy rate of 15-20%. Together 
with banking services, insurance services add about 7% to the country’s GDP. A welldeveloped 
and evolved insurance sector is a boon for economic development as it provides long- term funds
for infrastructure development at the same time strengthening the risk-taking ability of the 
country.
NATIONALIZATION OF INSURANCE SECTOR
By early 1970s, there were about 100 Indian insurers carrying on the general insurance business 
in India. Malpractices and mismanagement had crept into the management of these companies. 
Some insurance companies either liquidated or cheated the policy holders. There were 
complaints of falsification and denial of claims, interlocking of funds and other malpractices by 
many insurance companies. To protect public funds, the government started considering 
nationalization of the Insurance Industry. An Ordinance was issued on 19th January, 1956 
nationalizing the Life Insurance sector and Life Insurance Corporation came into existence in the 
same year. The LIC absorbed 154 Indian, 16 non-Indian insurers as also 75 provident societies—
245 Indian and foreign insurers in all. The LIC had monopoly till the late 90s when the Insurance 
sector was reopened to the private sector. In 1971, as a prelude to nationalization of the general 
insurance industry, the Govt. of India took over the management of all private general insurance 
companies. In the year 1972 General Insurance Business was nationalized. The main objective of 
this nationalization was to channelize the insurance funds for the benefit of the community at 
large. With the enactment of General Insurance Act 1972, General Insurance Corporation of 
India (GIC) was set up as a Holding Company. It had four subsidiaries: New India, Oriental, 
United India and National Insurance Companies. GIC was responsible for broad policy matters 
that could affect the general insurance industry in India. The company did not offer any direct 
insurance policies except the aviation insurance policies of Air India, Indian Airlines, Hindustan 
Aeronautics and Crop insurance. Thus General Insurance business was primarily conducted by 
the four subsidiaries of GIC. Apart from the four subsidiaries, GIC set up the GIC Asset 
Management Company to manage the GIC Mutual Fund, GIC Housing Finance, and Export 
Credit Guarantee Corporation.
LIBERALIZATION IN INSURANCE SECTOR
Although Indian Economy started opening up both to private sector and to foreign investment in 
the year 1991, Insurance sector still remained the domain of Govt. of India. However the 
Government realized that there was a need to bring reforms in the Insurance Sector in case this
sector has to evolve. With a view to bring reforms in the Insurance Sector the Central 
Government formed Malhotra Committee headed by former Finance Secretary and RBI 
Governor R.N. Malhotra in the year 1993. Thus the Malhotra committee was set up with the 
objective of complementing the reforms initiated in the financial sector. The reforms were aimed 
at creating a more efficient and competitive financial system suitable for the requirements of the 
economy keeping in mind the structural changes currently underway and recognizing that 
insurance is an important part of the overall financial system where it was necessary to address 
the need for similar reforms. In 1994, the committee submitted the report and some of the key 
recommendations included:
A. Structure
a. Government stake in the insurance Companies to be brought down to 50%.
b. Government should take over the holdings of GIC and its subsidiaries so that these 
subsidiaries can act as independent corporations.
c. All the insurance companies should be given greater freedom to operate.
B. Competition
a. Private Companies with a minimum paid up capital of Rs.1bn should be allowed to enter the 
sector.
b. No Company should deal in both Life and General Insurance through a single entity.
c. Foreign companies may be allowed to enter the industry in collaboration with the domestic 
companies.
d. Postal Life Insurance should be allowed to operate in the rural market. e. Only one State Level 
Life Insurance Company should be allowed to operate in each state.
C. Regulatory Body
a. The Insurance Act should be changed.
b. An Insurance Regulatory body should be set up.
c. Controller of Insurance- a part of the Finance Ministry- should be made independent
D. Investments
a. Mandatory Investments of LIC Life Fund in government securities to be reduced from 75% to 
50%.
b. GIC and its subsidiaries are not to hold more than 5% in any company (there current holdings 
to be brought down to this level over a period of time)
E. Customer Service
a. LIC should pay interest on delays in payments beyond 30 days.
b. Insurance companies must be encouraged to set up unit linked pension plans.
c. Computerization of operations and updating of technology to be carried out in the insurance 
industry. The committee emphasized that in order to improve the customer services and increase 
the coverage of insurance policies, industry should be opened up to competition. But at the same 
time, the committee felt the need to exercise caution as any failure on the part of new players 
could ruin the public confidence in the industry. Hence, it was decided to allow competition in a 
limited way by stipulating the minimum capital requirement of Rs.100 crores. The committee 
felt the need to provide greater autonomy to insurance companies in order to improve their 
performance and enable them to act as independent companies with economic motives. For this 
purpose, it had proposed setting up an independent regulatory body- The Insurance Regulatory 
and Development Authority.
IMPORTANT MILESTONES IN THE HISTORY OF INDIAN INSURANCE INDUSTRY
 1993 Malhotra Committee established
 1994 Recommendations of the Malhotra Committee published
 1995 Mukherjee Committee established
 1996 Setting up of (interim) Insurance Regulatory Authority (IRA)recommendations of the 
IRA  1997 Mukherjee Committee Report submitted but not made public
 1997 The government gives greater autonomy to Life Insurance Corporation, General 
Insurance Corporation, and its subsidiaries with regard to the restructuring of boards and 
flexibility in investment norms aimed at channeling funds to the infrastructure sector
 1998 The cabinet decides to allow 40 percent foreign equity in private insurance companies—
26 percent to foreign companies and 14 percent to non-resident Indians and Foreign Institutional 
Investors
 1999 The Standing Committee headed by MuraliDeora decides that foreign equity in private 
insurance should be limited to 26 percent. The IRA bill is renamed the Insurance Regulatory and 
Development Authority Bill
 1999 Cabinet clears Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Bill
 2000 President gives assent to the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Bill
What is Insurance?
Insurance is a means of protection from financial loss. It is a form of Risk Management primarily 
used to Hedge against the risk of a Contingent, Uncertain loss. (or)An arrangement by which a 
company or the state undertakes to provide a guarantee of compensation for specified loss, 
damages, illness or death in return for payment of a specified premium.
Dictionary of business and Finance defines “Insurance as a form of contract agreement under 
which one party agrees in return for a consideration to pay an agreed amount of money to 
another party to make good a loss, damage or injury to something of value in which the insured 
has a interest as a result of some uncertain event.
Meaning of Insurance – Insurance means a promise of compensation for any potential future 
losses. It facilitates financial protection against by reimbursing losses during crisis. There are 
different insurance companies that offer wide range of insurance options and an insurance 
purchaser can select as per own convenience and preference. Several insurances provide 
comprehensive coverage with affordable premiums. Premiums are periodical payment and 
different insurers offer diverse premium options. The periodical insurance premiums are 
calculated according to the total insurance amount. In other words, a promise of compensation
for specific potential future losses in exchange for a periodic payment. Insurance is designed to 
protect the financial well-being of an individual, company or other entity in the case of 
unexpected loss. Some forms of insurance are required by law, while others are optional. 
Agreeing to the terms of an insurance policy creates a contract between the insured and the 
insurer.
In exchange for payments from the insured (called premiums), the insurer agrees to pay the 
policy holder a sum of money upon the occurrence of a specific event. In most cases, the policy 
holder pays part of the loss (called the deductible), and the insurer pays the rest. Some important 
definitions of insurance are as follows: Insurance is cooperative form of distributing a certain 
risk over a group of persons who are exposed to it. Ghosh and Agarwal Insurance is an 
instrument of distributing the loss of few among many. Disnadle The collective bearing of risk is 
insurance. W. Beverideges
Main Branches of Insurance
- Accident Insurance
- Fire Insurance
- Holiday and Travel Insurance
- Household Insurance
- Liability Insurance
- Livestock and Bloodstock Insurance
- Marine Insurance
- Motor Insurance
- Pluvial Insurance
- Private Health Insurance
- Property Insurance
- Reinsurance
- Retrocession etc.
Basic Functions of Insurance 
1.Primary Functions 
2.Secondary Functions 
3.Other Functions
1.Primary functions of insurance
(a) Providing protection — The elementary purpose of insurance is to allow security against 
future risk, accidents and uncertainty. Insurance cannot arrest the risk from taking place, but can 
for sure allow for the losses arising with the risk. Insurance is in reality a protective cover against 
economic loss, by apportioning the risk with others.
(b) Collective risk bearing — Insurance is an instrument to share the financial loss. It is a 
medium through which few losses are divided among larger number of people. All the insured 
add the premiums towards a fund and out of which the persons facing a specific risk is paid.
(c) Evaluating risk — Insurance fixes the likely volume of risk by assessing diverse factors that 
give rise to risk. Risk is the basis for ascertaining the premium rate as well. Provide Certainty —
Insurance is a device, which assists in changing uncertainty to certainty.
2. Secondary functions of insurance
(a) Preventing losses — Insurance warns individuals and businessmen to embrace appropriate 
device to prevent unfortunate aftermaths of risk by observing safety instructions; installation of 
automatic sparkler or alarm systems, etc. '
(b) Covering larger risks with small capital — Insurance assuages the businessmen from security 
investments. This is done by paying small amount of premium against larger risks and dubiety. '
(c )Helps in the development of larger industries — Insurance provides an opportunity to 
develop to those larger industries which have more risks in their setting up.
3.Other functions of insurance
(a) Is a savings and investment tool — Insurance is the best savings and investment option, 
restricting unnecessary expenses by the insured. Also, to take the benefit of income tax 
exemptions, people take up insurance as a good investment option.
(b) Medium of earning foreign exchange — Being an international business, any country can 
earn foreign exchange by way of issue of marine insurance policies and a different other way.
(c) Risk Free trade — Insurance boosts exports insurance, making foreign trade risk free with the 
help of different types of policies under marine insurance cover. Insurance provides indemnity, 
or reimbursement, in the event of an unanticipated loss or disaster.
Importance of Insurance
I .Individual aspects:
(a) Security for health and property
(b) Encourage savings
(c)Encourage the habit of forced thrift
(d) Provide mental peace
(e) Increase efficiency
(f) Provision for the future
(g) Awareness for the future
(h) Credit Facility
(i) Tax exemption
(j) Contribution to the conservation of health
(k) Cover for legal liability
(l) Security to the mortgaged property
(m)Poster economic independence 
II Economic aspects
1. Safety against risk
2. Protection to employees
3. Basis of Credit
4. Protection from the loss of key man
5. Encourage loss prevention methods
6. Reduction of cost
7. Promote foreign trade
8. Development of big industries
9. Increase in efficiency 
III Social aspects
1. Stability in family life
2. Development of employment opportunity
3. Encourage alertness
4. Contributes to the development of basic facilities 
IV National aspects
1. Increase the national savings
2. Helps in development opportunities
3. Develops the money market
4. Earns foreign exchange
5. Capitalizes the savings
Need for Insurance
1. Removal of uncertainties: Insurance company takes the risks of large but uncertain losses in 
exchange for small premium. So it gives a sense of security, which is real gift to the business 
man. If all uncertainty could be removed from business, income would be sure. Insurance 
removed many uncertainties and to that extent is profitable.
2. Stimulant of business enterprise: Insurance facilitates to maintain the large size commercial 
and industrial organizations. No large scale industrial undertaking could function in the modern 
world without the transfer of many of its risks to insurer. It safeguards capital and at the same 
time it avoids the necessity on the part of industrialists. They are therefore free to use their 
capital as may seem best.
3. Promotion of saving: Saving is a device of preparing for the bad consequences of the future. 
Insurance policy is often very suitable way of providing for the future. This type of policy is
found particularly in life assurance. It promotes savings by making it compulsory which has a 
beneficial effect both for the individual and nation.
4. Correct distribution of cost: Insurance helps to maintain correct distribution of cost. Every 
business man tries to pass on to the consumer all types of costs including accidental and losses 
also. In the various fields of Insurance such losses are correctly estimated keeping in view a vast 
number of factors bearing on them. In the absence of insurance these losses and costs would be 
assessed and distributed only by guess work.
5. Source of credit: Modem business depends largely on credit; insurance has contributed ‘a lot 
in this regard. A life insurance policy increases the credit worthiness of the assured person 
because it can provide funds for repayment if he dies. Credit extension is also obtained by means 
of various kinds of property insurance. A businessman who stock of goods has been properly 
insured can get credit easily. Similarly, marine insurance is an essential requirement for every 
transaction of import and export.
6. Reduction of the chances of loss: Insurance companies spend large sums of money with a 
view to finding out the reasons of fire accidents, theft and robbery and suggest some measures to
prevent them. They also support several medical programs in order to make the public safety 
minded. Without such losses preventive activities of insurance companies, the chances of loss 
would have been greater than they are at present days.
7. Solution of social problems: Insurance serves as a useful device for solving complex social 
problems e.g. compensation is available to victims of Industrial injuries and road accident while 
the financial difficulties arising from old age, disability or death are minimized. It thus enables 
many families and business units to continue intact even after a loss.
8. Productive utilization of fund: Insurer accumulates large resources from the various insurance 
funds. Such resources are generally invested in the country, either in the public or private sector. 
This facilitates considerably in overall development of the economy.
9. Insurance as an investment: A life policy is a combination of protection and investment which 
serves a useful purpose. The premium that is paid by insured goes on accumulating in a fund 
every year. The sum so accumulated by the insurance company earns interest. Under life 
assurance a person may also invest his capital in an annuity which will pay him an income every 
year till death. Therefore, insurance may be regarded as an investment.
10. Promotion of international trade: The growth of the international trade of the country has 
been greatly helped by shifting of risk to insurance company. A ship sailing in the sea faces some 
misfortune. A fire breaks out and burns to ashes all the merchandise of a business man. But 
insurance is one of the devices by which these risks may be reduced or eliminated. So 
industrialists and exporter may devote their full attention toward the promotion of business 
which may increase the export activities.
11. Removing fear: Insurance helps to remove various types of fear from the mind of the people. 
The insured is secured in the knowledge that the protection of the insurance fund is behind him if 
some sad event happens. It thus creates confidence and eliminates worries which are difficult to 
evaluate, but the benefit is very real.
12. Favourable allocation of factors of production: Insurance also helps in achieving favourable 
allocation of the factors of production. Capital is usually shy in the risky business. People 
hesitate to invest their capital where financial losses are great. If protection is provided against
these risks by means of insurance, several investors will become ready to invest their funds in 
those fields.
13. Growth of Business competition: Insurance enables the small business units to compete upon 
more equal terms with the bigger organization. Without insurance it would have been impossible 
to undertake the risks themselves. On the other side bigger organization could absorb, their 
losses due to great financial strength. Moreover insurance removes uncertainty of financial losses 
arising out of the certain causes. It thus increases knowledge which is one of the most important 
preconditions of perfect competition.
14. Employment opportunity: Insurance provides employment opportunity to jobless persons 
which is helpful for the improvement and progress of social condition
15. Miscellaneous benefits: Following are some other miscellaneous benefits offered by 
insurance: (a) It establishes the relation between the employed and employer by providing 
various facilities i.e. group life insurance, social security scheme, retirement income plan, and 
workman’s compensation insurance.
(b) Insurance creates the confidence and sense of security among the policy holder.
(c) Insurance company provides valuable services of skilled and expert persons to industries and 
business in order to eliminate various risks.
(d)It promotes economic growth and development. This would be impossible in the Notes 
absence of insurance.
(e) It contributes to the efficiency of business and also industrial and commercial executives.
(f) Security of dependents is made possible through life assurance. It gives relief to helpless 
families after the death of the earning member of the family.
Importance of Insurance in Business
1. Theft: A new business is a big target for thieves. New computers, furniture and other office 
equipment are worth more at a pawn or chop shop than older equipment. Even older businesses 
that have just undergone renovations and upgrades are a target. Replacement insurance protects a
business in the event of stolen equipment, replacing the missing items and paying for repairs 
from damage caused by the invasion.
2. Liability: If a customer slips and falls while on your business premises or your product has a 
defect that injures a customer and you do not have insurance, this could spell the end of your 
business. If a company car is involved in an accident and someone is injured, that could be 
disastrous as well. Business liability insurance covers accidents that occur on the business 
premises, product defects and mishaps that occur during normal business operations on and off 
premises.
3. Level of Coverage: How much insurance to carry will depend on your industry, the business 
structure and the amount of assets your business has.Example: A law firm partnership that owns 
the building in which it is housed might need more insurance than a jewellery designer operating 
out of her home.
4. Litigation: We live in a litigious society. Even with the Texas tort reform legislation passed in 
2003, which capped judgments and sought to eliminate frivolous lawsuits, businesses are sued by 
individuals and other businesses for a variety of reasons, legitimate and otherwise. Even the most 
frivolous lawsuit can be costly to defend; and in the event business ends up on the losing end of a 
lawsuit, the awarded damages could exceed the business’s capabilities to pay. Depending on the 
business entity structure, not only the business assets, but also the owner’s personal assets could 
be at risk. Business liability insurance, malpractice insurance or professional liability insurance 
will cover at least part, if not all, of any damages.
5. Catastrophic Loss: Business insurance protects a business from closing due to a catastrophic 
loss. Fires, floods, hurricanes and tornadoes have been the end of many businesses in Texas, as 
elsewhere. When a company carries insurance against these types of losses, closure and loss are 
only temporary instead of permanent. Companies should always consider business interruption 
insurance, a rider on their business insurance policy, to ensure continued cash flow for the 
duration of a closure due to a natural disaster.
6. Personal Injury or Illness: Business owners should have personal insurance as well. Medical 
insurance will ensure medical bills incurred due to an illness or injury will not wipe out a 
business’s assets.
Nature of Insurance
1. Risk Sharing and Risk Transfer: Insurance is a device to share the financial losses, which 
might occur to an individual or his family on the happening of a specified event. The event may 
be death of the earning member of the family in the case of life insurance, marineperils in marine 
insurance, fire in fire insurance and other certain events in miscellaneous insurance, e.g., theft in 
burglary insurance, accidents in motor insurance, etc. The loss arising from these events if 
insured are shared by all the insured in the form of premium which they have already paid in 
advance. Hence, the risk is transferred from one individual to a group.
2. Co-operative Device: A group of persons who agree to share the financial loss may be brought 
together voluntarily or through publicity or through solicitations of the agents. An insurer, by 
insuring a large number of persons, is able to pay the amount of loss. Like all co-operative 
devices, there is no compulsion here on anybody to purchase the insurance policy (third party 
liability insurance in case of a vehicle owner is an exception).
3. Calculates Risk in Advance: The risk is evaluated on the basis of probability theory before 
insuring since the premium payable on a policy is to be determined. Probability theory is that 
body of knowledge, which is concerned with measuring the likelihood that something will 
happen and making estimates on the basis of this likelihood.
4. Payment of Claim at the Occurrence of Contingency: The payment is made on happening of a 
certain insured contingency. It is true for all non-life insurances that payment will be made on 
the happening of the specified contingency only. The life insurance claim is a certainty, because 
the contingency of death or the expiry of term will certainly occur and the payment is certain. 
Similarly, in certain types of life policies, payment is not certain due to uncertainty of a 
particular contingency within a particular period. Example: In term-insurance the payment is 
made only when death of the assured occurs within the specified term, may be one or two years. 
Similarly, in pure endowment, payment is made only at the survival of the insured at the Notes 
expiry of the period.
5. Amount of Payment: The amount of payment depends upon the value of loss suffered due to 
the happening of that particular insured risk, provided insurance is there up to that amount. In life 
insurance, the purpose is not to make good the financial loss suffered. Moreover, one cannot
estimate the value of a human being. A person is no doubt precious to his/her family. The insurer 
promises to pay a fixed sum on the happening of an event i.e. death or permanent disability. The 
amount of loss at the time of contingency is immaterial in life insurance. But in the property and 
general insurances, the amount of loss, as well as the happening of loss, is required to be proved.
6. Larger Number of Insured Persons: The price of insurance is basically linked to the cost of 
claims, which is only known subsequently. In the beginning, it is an unknown factor and an 
estimate is made on the basis of past claims experience or empirical data about the longevity of 
human beings, accidents and their financial consequences. Generally, the past claims experience 
is repeated with minor variations if a large number of risks are collected. This once again 
operates by the law of large numbers and is one reason why insurance companies want to do as 
much business as possible.
7.Insurance must not be confused with Charity or Gambling: The uncertainty is changed into 
certainty by insuring property and life because the insurer promises to pay a definite sum at 
damage or death. In the absence of insurance, the property owner could at the best, practice only 
some form of self-insurance, which may not give him absolute certainty. A family is protected 
against losses on death and damage with the help of insurance. From the point of view of an 
insurance company, the insurance contract is essentially non speculative. In fact, no other 
business operates with greater certainties. From the insured’s point of view, too, insurance is also 
not gambling. Failure of taking insurance, however, amounts to gambling because the 
uncertainty of loss is always looming on the head. One could also say that the insurance is just 
the opposite of gambling. In gambling, by bidding, the person exposes himself to risk of losing, 
but the insured safeguards himself through insurance, and may suffer loss only if he is not 
insured.
Types of Insurance
The following are the various types of insurance businesses recognised under the Insurance Act, 
1938:
(a) Life insurance business
(b) General insurance business (also called “Non-Life” business).This is sub divided into the 
following 3 sub-categories:
1. Fire insurance business
2. Marine insurance business
3. Miscellaneous insurance business
(I) Life Insurance Policies - Life Insurance refers to a policy or cover whereby the policyholder 
can ensure financial freedom for his/her family members after death. Suppose you are the sole 
earning member in your family, supporting your spouse and children.
In such an event, your death would financially devastate the whole family. Life insurance 
policies ensure that such a thing does not happen by providing financial assistance to your family 
in the event of your passing.
Types of Life Insurance Policies
A. Term Insurance Term Insurance is the simplest form of life insurance. It pays only if death 
occurs during the term of the policy, which is usually from one to 30 years. Most term policies 
have no other benefit provisions. Thus, the features of Term Insurance Plan are as follows: ¾ It 
is a pure life cover i.e. in the event of death of the insured the sum assured is paid to the family 
(beneficiaries). ¾ in case the insured survives the policy term, there is no return of premium. ¾ 
There is no investment component in a term plan Example Mr. X took a term insurance plan 
from ABC Life Insurance Co. Ltd. for a period of 20 years and sum assured of Rs.10lacs. In the 
event of his death, Rs.10lacs would be paid to Mrs. X. If Mr. X survives the term, there will be 
no return of premium.
B. Whole Life Insurance Under this policy premiums are paid throughout life and the sum 
insured becomes payable only at the death of the insured. The policy remains in force throughout 
the life of the assured and he continues to pay the premium till his death. This is the cheapest 
policy as the premium is to be paid till the death of the Insured. This is the cheapest policy as the 
premium charged is the lowest under this policy. This is also known as ‘ordinary life policy’. 
This policy is suitable to persons who want to make bequeathments for charitable purposes and 
to provide for their families after their death.
C. Endowment Plans An endowment policy is a saving linked Insurance policy with a specific 
maturity date. Under this policy the sum assured becomes payable if the assured reaches a 
particular age or after the expiry of a fixed period called the endowment period or at the death of 
the assured whichever is earlier. The premium under this policy is to be paid up to the maturity 
of the policy i.e. the time when the policy becomes payable. Premium would be little higher in 
case of this policy than the whole life policy. This is a very popular policy these days as it serves 
the dual purpose securing the family and /or saving for the retirement.
D. Children Policies: These types of policies are taken on the life of the parent/children for the 
benefit of the child. By such policy the parent can plan to get funds when the child attains 
various stages in life. Some Insurers offer waiver of premium in case of unfortunate death of the 
parent/proposer during the term of the policy.
E. Annuity/ Pension Plans: When an employee retires, he no longer gets his salary while his need 
for a regular income continues. Retirement benefits like Provident Fund and gratuity are paid in 
lump sum which are often spent too quickly or not invested prudently with the result that the 
employee finds himself without regular income in his post - retirement days. Pension is therefore 
an ideal method of retirement provision because the benefit is in the form of regular income. It is 
wise to provide for old age, when we have regular income during our earning period to take care 
of rainy days. Financial independence during old age is a must for everybody. This issue of 
having regular income during old age is taken care off by Annuity Policies. It is a policy under 
which the insured amount is payable to the assured by monthly or annual instalments after he 
attains a certain age. The assured may pay the premium regularly over a certain period or he may 
pay the premium regularly over a certain period or he may a lump sum of money at the outset. 
These policies are useful to persons who wish to provide a regular income for themselves and 
their dependents.
F. Money Back Policies Money Back Plan is a special type of Life Insurance Policy. Under this 
policy the money comes back to the Life Insured after specified intervals of time as Survival 
Benefits. However, if the Life insured dies during the term of the policy then the death benefit 
will be paid to the nominee and the policy would be terminated and no further money would be 
paid to him at regular intervals. Thus a money back policy is an endowment policy with liquidity 
benefit. The maturity benefit comes in instalments instead of Lump Sum at the end of the term of 
the policy. These benefits received at regular intervals are called Survival Benefits. Each
installment is a percentage of sum assured. The remaining bit comes from maturity benefit at the 
end of the term of the policy. Illustration Bhakt Sethi has opted for a Money Back Life Insurance 
Policy. His plan has a Sum Assured of 5 lakhs for a policy term of 25 years. He would need to 
pay premiums for 25 years. And he would get back a part of the Sum Assured at regular 
intervals. For example, for a policy of 25 years, he would get 15% of Sum Assured after the 5th, 
10th, 15th and 20th year of the policy i.e. he gets 15 X 4 = 60% of the Sum Assured as Survival 
Benefit. On Maturity of the policy he would get the remaining 40% of the Sumassured.
G. Group Insurance- Group insurance refers to the life insurance protection to group of persons. 
Opting for group insurance provides the advantage of a standardized cover to the group at 
competitive rates. They are suitable for large part of population who cannot afford individual life 
cover. Further members of an eligible group who otherwise cannot be insured can benefit 
through group insurance. Once the conditions of group insurance are satisfied, members can get 
life insurance at significantly lower rates compared to individual policies. The group may consist 
of employees, doctors, lawyers, credit societies etc. A group insurance scheme can be either
a. Contributory scheme – In this case the premium on the group life insurance policy is paid by 
both the employer and the employee.
b. Non-Contributory scheme – In this case premium is paid by the employer or the main agency 
fully.
H. Unit Linked Insurance Plan Unit linked insurance plans (ULIPs) aim to serve both the 
protection and investment objectives of investing. ULIP’s are subject to capital market risks.
Objectives of Life Insurance
Life Insurance is a financial cover for a contingency or risk linked with human life such as loss 
of life by death, disability, accident, retirement etc. Thus the risk to human life is due to natural 
factors or causes related to various types of accidents. When human life is lost or a person is 
disabled permanently or temporarily there is a loss of income to the entire household. It is not 
possible to value human life rather it would be more appropriate to say that it is beyond any 
value. However,a method to determine loss would be to assess the same on the basis of loss of 
income in the future years, also known as Human Life Value.
Thus Life Insurance policies provide for a definite amount of money to be paid by the Insurer in 
the event the Insured dies during the term of the policy. Thus the essential features of life 
insurance can be summed up as under:
- It is a contract relating to human life.
- There need not be an express provision that payment is due on the death of a person.
- A definite agreed money known as premium needs to be paid for starting a Life Insurance 
Contract/Policy.
- The contract provides for payment of lump sum money
- The amount is paid at the expiration of a certain period or on the death of a person.
Advantages of Life Insurance
Life Insurance provides dual benefits to the persons taking such insurance. These dual benefits 
are savings and security. The following factors explain as to why this investment tool should be a 
part of one’s financial plans.
A. Risk Cover Life is today full of uncertainties. In this scenario Life Insurance ensures that the 
loved ones of the Insured continue to enjoy good quality of life against any unforeseen 
circumstances
B. Planning Life Stage Needs Life Insurance not only provides for financial support in the event 
of untimely death but also acts as a long-term investment. One can meet one’s goals, be it 
children's education, their marriage, building one’s dream home or planning a relaxed retired life.
C. Habit of Saving Life Insurance is a long-term contract whereas policy holder one has to pay a 
fixed amount at specified periods. This builds the habit of Long term savings. Regular Savings 
over a long period ensures that a decent corpus is built to meet various needs at different stages 
of life.
D. Safety of Investment The investment made in Life Insurance is quite safe as Life Insurance is 
a highly regulated sector. The body that regulates Insurance Sector in India is called IRDA 
(Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority)
E. Liquidity Life Insurance provides good liquidity to the Policy Holder as they have the option 
of taking loan against their policy. Thus when there is an urgent need of funds, the insured can
avail the facility of loan against his policy which will, however, depend upon the surrender value 
of the Policy.
F. Tax Benefits The premiums paid for life insurance policies and the amounts received in the 
event of death or on maturity of the said policy attract tax benefits.
II.GENERAL INSURANCE POLICY
 A policy or agreement between the policyholder and the insurer which is considered only after 
realization of the premium.
 The premium is paid by the insurer who has a financial interest in the asset covered.
 The insurer will protect the insured from the financial liability in case of loss.
How does the concept of General Insurance work?
Insurance is a concept that applies to a large group of people which may suffer the same risk in 
the same conditions or region. The money collected as the premium can be called as a pool and 
when anyone faces a loss, the person is paid from that pool.
Still perplexed at how does a general insurance policy come into play? Consider that your 
mother suffered a heart attack suddenly and she needs a transplant. At the same time, your 
daughter’s college fee was due. It definitely is a huge expense to be made at the same time and 
none can be preferred over the other. In this time of stress, the family’s health insurance policy 
can save your burden and the fees can be paid from the savings. A General Insurance Policy here 
works to save your burden for money.
Why do we need General Insurance?
Imagine you're driving back home in your car and suddenly, a taxi hits you from behind. Your 
car has a dent and its bumper has come off too. Now you need about Rs. 2000/- for the dent and 
Rs.7500/- for the bumper to be able to fix it all.
A car insurance policy, in this case, will play well. You can get the amount reimbursed under the 
insurance policy. Your car is the asset here in which you have a financial interest. But remember, 
an insurance policy will pay only as per its predefined conditions.
(a) Fire Insurance
Fire insurance pays or compensates for the damages caused to your property or goods due to 
fire.It covers the replacement, reconstruction or repair expenses of the insured property as well as 
the surrounding structures.It also covers the damages caused to a third-party property due to 
fire.In addition to these, it takes care of the expenses of those whose livelihood has been affected 
due to fire.
Types of fire insurance
Some of the common types are:
Valued policy
The insurer firsts value the property and then undertakes to pay compensation up to 
that value in the case of loss or damage.
Floating policy It covers the damages to properties lying at different places.
Comprehensive 
policy
This is known as an all-in-one policy.It has a wide coverage and includes damages 
due to fire, theft, burglary, etc.
Specific policy
This covers you for a specific amount which is less than the real value of the 
property.
[ (b) Motor Insurance
Motor Insurance refers to policies that offer financial assistance in the event of accidents 
involving your car or bike. Motor insurance can be availed for three categories of motorised 
vehicles, including:
 Car Insurance - Personally owned four-wheeler vehicles are covered under such a 
policy.
 Two-wheeler Insurance - Personally owned two-wheeler vehicles, including bikes
and scooters, are covered under these plans.
 Commercial Vehicle Insurance - If you own a vehicle that is used commercially, 
you need to avail insurance for the same. These policies ensure that your business 
automobiles stay in the best of shapes, reducing losses significantly.
Types of Motor Insurance Policies
Based on the extent of cover or protection offered, motor insurance policies are of three
types, namely:
 Third-Party Liability - This is the most basic type of motor insurance cover in 
India. It is the minimum mandatory requirement for all motorised vehicle owners, as 
per the Motor Vehicles Act of 1988. Due to the limited financial assistance, 
premiums for such policies also tend to be low. These insurance plans only pay the 
financial liability to the third-party affected in the said mishap, ensuring that you do 
not face legal hassle due to the accident. They, however, do not offer any financial 
assistance to repair the policyholder’s vehicle after accidents.
 Comprehensive Cover - Compared to the third-party liability option, 
comprehensive insurance plans offer better protection and security. Apart from 
covering third party liabilities, these plans also cover the expenses incurred for 
repairing the damages to the policyholder’s own vehicle due to an 
accident. Additionally, comprehensive plans also offer a payout in case your vehicle 
sustains damage due to fire, man-made and natural calamities, riots and others such 
instances. Lastly, you can recover your bike’s cost if it gets stolen, when you have a 
comprehensive cover in place. One can also opt for several add-ons with their 
comprehensive motor insurance policy that can make it better-rounded. Some of 
these add-ons include zero depreciation cover, engine and gear-box protection 
cover, consumable cover, breakdown assistance, etc.
 Own Damage Cover - This is a specialized form of motor insurance, which 
insurance companies offer to consumers. Further, you are eligible to avail such a 
plan only if you purchased the two-wheeler or car after September 2018. The 
vehicle must be brand new and not a second-hand one. You should also remember 
that you can avail this standalone own damage cover only if you already have a
third party liability motor insurance policy in place. With own damage cover, you 
basically receive the same benefits as a comprehensive policy without the thirdparty liability portion of the policy.
Benefits of Motor Insurance Policies
Cars and bikes are increasingly more expensive with each passing day. At such a time, staying 
without proper insurance can lead to severe monetary losses for the owner. Listed below are 
some advantages of purchasing such a plan.
 Prevents Legal Hassle - Helps you avoid any traffic fines and other legalitiesthat 
you would otherwise need to bear.
 Meets All Third-Party Liability - If you injure a person or damage someone’s 
property during a vehicular accident, the insurance policy helps you meet the 
monetary losses, effectively.
 Financial Assistance to Repair Your own Vehicle - After accidents, you need to 
spend considerable sums on repairing your own vehicle. Insurance plans limit such 
out of pocket expenses, allowing you to undertake repairs immediately.
 Theft/loss cover - If your vehicle is stolen, your insurance policy will help you 
reclaim a portion of the car/bike’s on-road price. You can expect similar assistance 
if your vehicle is damaged beyond repair due to accidents.
Additionally, individuals who own a commercial car/two-wheeler can also avail tax benefits if 
they pay premiums for that vehicle.
(c)Health Insurance
Health insurance refers to a type of general insurance, which provides financial assistance to 
policyholders when they are admitted to hospitals for treatment. Additionally, some plans also 
cover the cost of treatment undertaken at home, prior to a hospitalization or after discharge from 
the same.
With the rising medical inflation in India, buying health insurance has become a necessity. 
However, before proceeding with your purchase, consider the various types of health insurance 
plans available in India.
Types of Health Insurance policies
There are eight main types of health insurance policies available in India. They are:
 Individual Health Insurance - These are healthcare plans that offer medical cover 
to just one policyholder.
 Family Floater Insurance - These policies allow you to avail health insurance for 
your entire family without needing to buy separate plans for each member. 
Generally, husband, wife and two of their children are allowed health cover under 
one such family floater policy.
 Critical Illness Cover - These are specialized health plans that provide extensive 
financial assistance when the policyholder is diagnosed with specific, chronic 
illnesses. These plans provide a lump-sum payout after such a diagnosis, unlike 
typical health insurance policies.
 Senior Citizen Health Insurance - As the name suggests, these policies 
specifically cater to individuals aged 60 years and beyond.
 Group Health Insurance - Such policies are generally offered to employees of an 
organization or company. They are designed in such a way that older beneficiaries 
can be removed, and fresh beneficiaries can be added, as per the company’s 
employee retention capability.
 Maternity Health Insurance - These policies cover medical expenses during prenatal, post-natal and delivery stages. It covers both the mother as well as her 
newborn.
 Personal Accident Insurance - These medical insurance policies only cover 
financial liability from injuries, disability or death arising due to accidents.
 Preventive Healthcare Plan - Such policies cover the cost of treatment concerned 
with preventing a severe disease or condition.
Benefits of Health Insurance
After assessing the various kinds of health insurance available, you must be wondering why 
availing such a plan is essential for you and your loved ones. Look at the reasons listed below to 
understand why.
 Medical Cover - The primary benefit of such insurance is that it offers financial 
coverage against medical expenditure.
 Cashless Claim - If you seek treatment at one of the hospitals that have tie-ups with 
your insurance provider, you can avail cashless claim benefit. This feature ensures 
that all medical bills are directly settled between your insurer and hospital.
 Tax Benefits - Those who pay health insurance premiums can enjoy income tax
benefits. Under Section 80D of the Income Tax Act one can avail a tax benefit of up 
to Rs.1 Lakh on the premium payment of their health insurance policies.
(d) Travel Insurance
When talking about the different types of insurance policies, one must not forget to learn more 
about travel insurance plans. Such policies ensure the financial safety of a traveller during a trip. 
Therefore, when compared to other insurance policies, travel insurance is a short-term cover.
Depending on the provider you choose, travel insurance may offer financial aid at various times, 
such as during loss of baggage, trip cancellation and much more. Here is a look at some of the 
different types of travel insurance plans available in the country:
 Domestic Travel Insurance - This is the kind of travel insurance policy that 
safeguards your finances during travels within India. However, if you plan to step 
outside the country for a vacation, such a policy would not offer any aid.
 International Travel Insurance - If you are stepping out of the country, ensure 
you pick an international travel insurance plan. It allows you to cover the 
unforeseen expenses that can arise during your trip like medical emergencies, 
baggage loss, loss of passport, etc.
 Home Holiday Insurance - When you are travelling with family, your home 
remains unguarded and unprotected. Chances of burglary are always significant, 
which may lead to significant losses. Thankfully, with home holiday insurance 
plans, which are often included within travel policies, you are financially protected 
from such events as well.
Benefits of Travel Insurance
The following aspects are covered under travel insurance plans:
 Cover Flight Delay - Flight delays or cancellations can lead to significant losses for 
the passenger. If you buy travel insurance, you can claim such financial losses from 
the insurer.
 Baggage Loss/Delay - Travel insurance lets you claim monetary assistance if there 
is a delay or you happen to lose your luggage during the trip. With this amount, you 
can purchase some of the necessary items.
 Reclaim Lost Travel Documents - Visa and passport are essential documents 
during an international trip. Opting for international travel insurance ensuresthat 
you have the necessary financial backing to reapply for interim or replacement 
documents as and when necessary.
 Trip Cancellation Cover - A sudden death in the family or a medical emergency 
may play spoilsport with your travel arrangements. Thankfully, international travel 
insurance plans support trip cancellations in such events. You can claim financial 
assistance to pay penalties and cancellation charges for flights, hotels, etc.
(e) Property Insurance- Any building or immovable structure can be insured through property
insurance plans. This can be either your residence or commercial space. If any damage befalls 
such a property, you can claim financial assistance from the insurance provider. Keep in mind 
that such a plan also financially safeguards the content inside the property.
Types of Property Insurance in India
Here are some types of property insurance policies available in India:
 Home Insurance - With such a policy, you remain free from all financial liabilities 
that may arise from damage to your home or contents inside due to fires, burglaries, 
storms, earthquakes, explosions and other events.
 Shop Insurance - If you own a shop, which acts as a source of income for you, it is 
integral to protect yourself from financial liability arising from the same. Whether 
the liability occurs due to natural calamities or due to accidents, with these plans, 
you can immediately undertake repairs to the shop.
 Office Insurance - Another type of property insurance policy, office insurance 
ensures that the office building and all the equipment inside are significantly 
protected in the event of unforeseen events. Generally, office spaces include 
expensive equipment, such as computers, servers and much more. Thus, availing 
these plans is essential.
 Building Insurance - If you own a complete building, opting for home insurance 
may not be sufficient. Instead, you can purchase building insurance to cover the 
entire premises.
Benefits of Property Insurance
 Protection against Fires - While the insurance policy cannot prevent fires, it can 
prevent financial liabilities from such an event.
 Burglaries - If your property exists in an area prone to theft and burglaries, such a 
policy is vital to ensure financial security.
 Floods - In certain parts of India, floods are common. These floods can ravage your 
property leading to substantial losses. Property insurance also protects against such 
events.
 Natural Calamities - The plan also offers financial aid against damage arising from 
earthquakes, storms and more.
Rebuilding or renovation of a property is immensely expensive. Thus, property insurance 
policies are the best option to ensure long-term financial health.
(f) Mobile Insurance
Owing to the rising price of mobile phones and their several applications today, it has become 
imperative to insure the device. Mobile insurance allows you to reclaim money that you spend on 
repairing your phone in the event of accidental damage.
Further, you can also claim the same in case of phone theft, making it easier to replace the 
handset with a new phone.
Benefits of Mobile Insurance
Mobile insurance policies are extremely beneficial, especially for those who own a premium 
smartphone.
 Comprehensive protection for new devices - The value of phones tends to decline 
with time. Thus, when the handset is new, phone insurance can help safeguard its 
significant value.
 Coverage against Damage to Screen - If you accidentally damage the smartphone 
screen, which is one of the most important parts of such devices, your insurance 
plan will pay for the repair expenses.
 Theft or Robbery of Smartphone - Nothing is worse than buying your dream 
smartphone and losing it due to theft or burglary. Well, phone insurance will help 
you afford a replacement handset if such an unfortunate thing happens.
Some insurers may not allow you to buy insurance for the smartphone after a month or two 
passes from the purchase of the handset.
(g) Cycle Insurance
Bicycles are valuable properties in India as some people rely on these vehicles for their daily 
commute. A cycle insurance policy ensures that you have access to necessary funds should your 
bicycle undergo accidental damage or theft. It saves your out of pocket expenses, while also 
ensuring immediate repairs to the vehicle.
Benefits of Cycle Insurance
The advantages of availing such an insurance policy are:
 Worldwide Coverage - Depending on the insurance provider, cycle insurance 
policies provide financial assistance regardless of where your bicycle undergoes 
damage. Even if you meet with a cycling accident in a different country, such a plan 
will offer aid.
 Protection against Fires and Riots - If your bicycle sustains damage due to 
accidental fires and/or rioting, insurance policies will provide the necessary 
financial assistance to repair or undo the damage.
 Accidental Death Benefit - If you pass away due to bicycle accidents, the 
insurance policy for the cycle would offer a lump-sum payout to yoursurviving 
family members.
Regardless of your cycle’s price, opting for insurance can reduce your financial liabilities 
significantly.
(h) Bite-Size Insurance
Bite-sized insurance policies refer to sachet insurance plans that minimize your financial liability 
for a very limited tenure, generally up to a year.
These insurance plans allow you to protect your finances against specific damage or threats.
For instance, particular bite-sized insurance may offer accidental cover of Rs. 1 Lakh for a 
year. You can choose this policy when you think you might be particularly susceptible to 
accidental injuries.
Another example is insurance cover for specific diseases. For instance, if your area is prone to 
water-borne diseases, such as cholera, you can pick a policy that covers cholera treatment and all 
associated costs for a 1-year period.
Benefits of Bite-sized Insurance
The primary benefit of bite-size insurance policies is that it allows you to avail financial 
protection at very limited prices.
The premiums are so low that it hardly makes any impact on your overall monthly expenditures. 
In comparison, the sum insured is significant.
Principles of Insurance
The business of insurance aims to protect the economic value of assets or life of a person. 
Through a contract of insurance, the insurer agrees to make good any loss on the insured 
property or loss of life (as the case may be) that may occur in course of time in consideration for 
a small premium to be paid by the insured. Apart from the above essentials of a valid contract, 
insurance contracts are subject to additional principles.
These are:
1. Principle of Utmost good faith
2. Principle of Insurable interest
3. Principle of Indemnity
4. Principle of Subrogation
5. Principle of Contribution
6. Principle of Proximate cause
7. Principle of Loss of Minimization
These distinctive features are based on the basic principles of law and are applicable to all types 
of insurance contracts. These principles provide guidelines based upon which insurance 
agreements are undertaken. A proper understanding of these principles is therefore necessary for 
a clear interpretation of insurance contracts and helps in proper termination of contracts, 
settlement of claims, enforcement of rules and smooth award of verdicts in case of disputes.
1. Principleof Uberrimae Fidei (Utmost Good Faith)
• Both the parties i.e. the insured and the insurer should have a good faith towards each other.
• The insurer must provide the insured complete, correct and clear information of subject matter.
• The insurer must provide the insured complete, correct and clear information regarding terms 
and conditions of the contract.
• This principle is applicable to all contracts of insurance i.e. life, fire and marine insurance. 
Principle of Uberrimae fidei (a Latin phrase), or in simple English words, the Principle of 
Utmost Good Faith, is a very basic and first primary principle of insurance.
According to this principle, the insurance contract must be signed by both parties (i.e. insurer and 
insured) in an absolute good faith or belief or trust. The person getting insured must willingly 
disclose and surrender to the insurer his complete true information regarding the subject matter 
of insurance. The insurer's liability gets void (i.e legally revoked or cancelled) if any facts, about 
the subject matter of insurance are either omitted, hidden, falsified or presented in a wrong 
manner by the insured.
The principle of Uberrimae fidei applies to all types of insurance contracts.
For example, if any person has taken a life insurance policy by hiding the fact that he is a cancer 
patient and later on if he dies because of cancer then insurance company can refuse to pay the 
compensation as the fact was hidden by the insured.
2. Principle of Insurable Interest
• The insured must have insurable interest in the subject matter of insurance.
• In life insurance it refers to the life insured.
• In marine insurance it is enough if the insurable interest exists only at the time of occurrence of 
the loss.
• In fire and general insurance, it must be present at the time of taking policy and also at the time 
of the occurrence of loss.
• The owner of the party is said to have insurable interest as long as he is the owner of it.
• It is applicable to all contracts of insurance. The principle of insurable interest states that the 
person getting insured must have insurable interest in the object of insurance. A person has an 
insurable interest when the physical existence of the insured object gives him some gain but its 
non-existence will give him a loss. In simple words, the insured person must suffer some 
financial loss by the damage of the insured object.
For example: - The owner of a taxicab has insurable interest in the taxicab because he is getting 
income from it. But, if he sells it, he will not have an insurable interest left in that taxicab. From 
above example, we can conclude that, ownership plays a very crucial role in evaluating insurable 
interest. Every person has an insurable interest in his own life. A merchant has insurable interest 
in his business of trading. Similarly, a creditor has insurable interest in his debtor.
For example, if a person has taken the loan against the security of a factory premises then the 
lender can take fire insurance policy of that factory without being the owner of the factory 
because he has financial interest in the factory premises.
3. Principle of Indemnity
• Indemnity means guarantee or assurance to put the insured in the same position in which he 
was immediately prior to the happening of the uncertain event. The insurer undertakes to make 
good the loss.
• It is applicable to fire, marine and other general insurance.
• Under this the insurer agreed to compensate the insured for the actual loss suffered. Indemnity 
means security, protection and compensation given against damage, loss or injury.
According to the principle of indemnity, an insurance contract is signed only for getting 
protection against unpredicted financial losses arising due to future uncertainties. Insurance 
contract is not made for making profit else its sole purpose is to give compensation in case of any 
damage or loss. In an insurance contract, the amount of compensations paid is in proportion to 
the incurred losses. The amount of compensations is limited to the amount assured or the actual 
losses, whichever is less. The compensation must not be less or more than the actual damage. 
Compensation is not paid if the specified loss does not happen due to a particular reason during a 
specific time period. Thus, insurance is only for giving protection against losses and not for 
making profit.
However, in case of life insurance, the principle of indemnity does not apply because the value 
of human life cannot be measured in terms of money.
For example, a person insured a car for 2.5 lakh against damage on an accident case. Due to 
accident he suffered a loss of 1.5 lakh, then the insurance company will compensate him 1.5 lakh 
only not the policy amount i.e., 2.5 lakh as the purpose behind it is to compensate not to make 
profit.
4. Principle of Subrogation
• As per this principle after the insured is compensated for the loss due to damage to property 
insured, then the right of ownership of such property passes to the insurer.
• This principle is corollary of the principle of indemnity and is applicable to all contracts of 
indemnity. Subrogation means substituting one creditor for another. Principle of Subrogation is 
an extension and another corollary of the principle of indemnity. It also applies to all contracts of 
indemnity. According to the principle of subrogation, when the insured is compensated for the 
losses due to damage to his insured property, then the ownership right of such property shifts to 
the insurer. This principle is applicable only when the damaged property has any value after the 
event causing the damage. The insurer can benefit out of subrogation rights only to the extent of 
the amount he has paid to the insured as compensation.
For example:- Mr. Arvind insures his house for Rs. 1 million. The house is totally destroyed by 
the negligence of his neighbor Mr. Mohan. The insurance company shall settle the claim of Mr. 
Arvind for Rs. 1 million. At the same time, it can file a law suit against Mr. Mohan for Rs. 1.2 
million, the market value of the house. If insurance company wins the case and collects Rs. 1.2 
million from Mr. Mohan, then the insurance company will retain Rs. 1 million (which it has 
already paid to Mr. Arvind) plus other expenses such as court fees. The balance amount, if any 
will be given to Mr. Arvind, the insured.
5. Principle of contribution• The principle is corollary of the principle of indemnity. • It is 
applicable to all contracts of indemnity. • Under this principle the insured can claim the 
compensation only to the extent of actual loss either from any one insurer or all the insurers. 
Principle of Contribution is a corollary of the principle of indemnity. It applies to all contracts of 
indemnity, if the insured has taken out more than one policy on the same subject matter. 
According to this principle, the insured can claim the compensation only to the extent of actual 
loss either from all insurers or from any one insurer. If one insurer pays full compensation then 
that insurer can claim proportionate claim from the other insurers.
For example :- Mr. Arvind insures his property worth Rs. 100,000 with two insurers "AIG Ltd." 
for `90,000 and "MetLife Ltd." For `60,000. Arvind's actual property destroyed is worth Rs. 
60,000, then Mr. Arvind can claim the full loss of `60,000 either from AIG Ltd. or MetLife Ltd., 
or he can claim `36,000 from AIG Ltd. and `24,000 from Metlife Ltd. So, if the insured claims 
full amount of compensation from one insurer then he cannot claim the same compensation from 
other insurer and make a profit. Secondly, if one insurance company pays the full compensation 
then it can recover the proportionate contribution from the other insurance company.
6. Principle of Causa Proxima (NEAREST CAUSE)
• The loss of insured property can be caused by more than one cause in succession to another.
• The property may be insured against some causes and not against all causes.
• In such an instance, the proximate cause or nearest cause of loss is to be found out.
• If the proximate cause is the one which is insured against, the insurance company is bound to 
pay the compensation and vice versa. Principle of Causa Proxima (a Latin phrase), or in simple
english words, the Principle of Proximate (i.e Nearest) Cause, means when a loss is caused by 
more than one causes, the proximate or the nearest or the closest cause should be taken into 
consideration to decide the liability of the insurer. The principle states that to find out whether 
the insurer is liable for the loss or not, the proximate (closest) and not the remote (farest) must be 
looked into.
For example:- A cargo ship's base was punctured due to rats and so sea water entered and cargo 
was damaged. Here there are two causes for the damage of the cargo ship - (i) The cargo ship 
getting punctured because of rats, and (ii) The sea water entering ship through puncture. The risk 
of sea water is insured but the first cause is not. The nearest cause of damage is sea water which 
is insured and therefore the insurer must pay the compensation. However, in case of life 
insurance, the principle of Causa Proxima does not apply. Whatever may be the reason of death 
(whether a natural death or an unnatural death) the insurer is liable to pay the amount of 
insurance.
7. Principle of loss minimization
• Under this principle it is the duty of the insured to take all possible steps to minimize the loss 
to the insured property on the happening of uncertain event. According to the Principle of Loss 
Minimization, insured must always try his level best to minimize the loss of his insured property, 
in case of uncertain events like a fire outbreak or blast, etc. The insured must take all possible 
measures and necessary steps to control and reduce the losses in such a scenario. The insured 
must not neglect and behave irresponsibly during such events just because the property is 
insured. Hence it is a responsibility of the insured to protect his insured property and avoid 
further losses.
For example :- Assume, Mr. Arvind's house is set on fire due to an electric short-circuit. In this 
tragic scenario, Mr. Arvind must try his level best to stop fire by all possible means, like first 
calling nearest fire department office, asking neighbours for emergency fire extinguishers, etc. 
He must not remain inactive and watch his house burning hoping, "Why should I worry? I've 
insured my house."
DIFFERENTIATION INSURANCE AND GUARANTEE
Insurance is a contract of indemnity whereby Insurer agrees to indemnify, or pay, the insured for 
certain types of loss while in a contract of guarantee, one party agrees to act on behalf of another 
should that second party default.
In plain terms, this means that if an individual fails to pay her guaranteed debt or to perform 
some other duty or obligation, the guarantor, the party who has agreed to act on behalf of another 
will step in to pay or perform the obligation.
There are two major differences between insurance and guarantees. One difference is that 
insurance is a direct agreement between the insurance provider and the policyholder, while a 
guarantee involves an indirect agreement between a beneficiary and a third party, along with the 
primary agreement between the principal and beneficiary.
A second difference is that insurance policy calculations are based on underwriting and possible 
loss, while a guarantee is focused strictly on performance or nonperformance. In addition, 
insurance providers or policyholders can cancel policies with notice, while guarantees often 
cannot be canceled.
The difference between a contract of Insurance and a contract of guarantee are as given below:
CONTRACT OF INSURANCE CONTRACT OF GUARANTEE
In a contract of insurance, there are two parties
i.e. insurer and insured.
In a contract of Guarantee there are three 
parties i.e. Main Debtor, Creditor & Surety
Insurance contract is generally cancellable Contract of Guarantee is Non-Cancellable 
Insurance premium is based on the probability
and quantum of losses
In contract of business, loss cannot be 
estimated generally so fee is charged for the 
guarantee service rendered an insurance 
contract transfers the risk.
There is no transfer of risk in a contract of 
guarantee
.
Insurance and wager A contract of Insurance, i.e. life, accident, fire, marine, etc. is not a wager 
though it is performable upon an uncertain event. It is so because; the principle of insurable 
interest distinguishes insurance from a wagering contract. Insurable interest is the interest which 
one has in the safety or preservation of the subject matter of insurance. Where insurable interest 
is not present in insurance contracts, it becomes a wagering contract and is therefore void. The 
following are the points of distinction between wagering agreements and insurance contracts.
1. A contract of insurance is a contract to make good the loss of property (or life) of another 
person against some consideration called premium. A wagering agreement is an agreement to 
pay money or money's worth on the happening of an uncertain event.
2. The parties have no insurable interest in a wagering agreement. But the holder of an insurance 
policy must have an insurable interest.
3. In wagering agreement, neither party has any interest in happening or non-happening of an 
event. But in a contract of insurance, both parties are interested in the subject-matter.
4. Contracts of insurance are contracts of indemnity except life insurance contract, which is a 
contingent contract. But a wagering agreement is a conditional contract.
5. Contract of insurance are based on scientific and actuarial calculation of risks, whereas 
wagering agreements are a gamble without any scientific calculation of risk.
6. Contracts of insurance are regarded as beneficial to the public and hence encouraged by the 
State but wagering agreements serve no useful purpose.
7. A contract of insurance is a valid contract where as a wagering agreement is void being 
expressly declared by law.
DISCLOSURES
The principle of Uberrimae fidei applies to all types of insurance contracts and is a very basic 
and primary principle of insurance. According to this principle, the insurance contract must be 
signed by both parties (i.e insurer and insured) in absolute good faith or belief or trust. The
person getting insured must willingly disclose and surrender to the insurer all relevant complete 
true information regarding the subject matter of insurance. The insurer's liability is voidable (i.e 
legally revoked or cancelled) if any facts, about the subject matter of insurance are either 
omitted, hidden, falsified or presented in a wrong manner by the insured. The principle forbids 
either party to an insurance contract, by non-disclosure or mis-representation of a material fact, 
which he knows or ought to know, to draw the other into the bargain, from his ignorance of that 
fact and his believing the contrary. The duty of the utmost good faith is implied in insurance 
contracts because they are entered into by parties who have not the same access to relevant 
information. In this, they differ from contracts of sale to which the maxim caveat emptor (let the 
buyer beware) applies. Although the duty rests upon both parties, it is the duty of the proposer 
which needs to be discussed in some detail for he usually has the advantage of knowing most of 
the particulars relating to the subject-matter. Until a definite offer to enter into an insurance 
contract has been unconditionally accepted the duty of the utmost good faith must be strictly 
observed. The obligation arises again prior to each renewal and, to a limited extent, when the 
insured desires an alteration in the policy. In the latter case, he must inform the insurer of any 
fact’s material to the alteration.
MATERIAL FACTS
Material fact is every circumstance or information, which would influence the judgment of a 
prudent insurer in assessing the risk. Or Those circumstances which influence the insurer’s 
decision to accept or refuse the risk or which affect the fixing of the premium or the terms and 
conditions of the contract, must be disclosed. A material fact is one which would have influenced 
the judgment of a prudent insurer in deciding whether he would accept the risk in whole or in 
part and, if so, at what amount of premium. The materiality of a fact depends upon the 
application of this test to the particular circumstances of the case as at the date that the fact 
should have been communicated. Material facts may have a bearing on the physical hazard or on 
the moral hazard, or they may show that if a loss occurs the insurer's liability is likely to be 
greater than would normally be expected.
FACTS, WHICH MUST BE DISCLOSED
i.Facts, which show that a risk represents a greater exposure than would be expected from its 
nature e.g., the fact that a part of the building is being used for storage of inflammable materials.
ii. External factors that make the risk greater than normal e.g. the building is located next to a 
warehouse storing explosive material.
iii. Facts, which would make the amount of loss greater than that normally expected e.g. there is 
no segregation of hazardous goods from non-hazardous goods in the storage facility.
iv. History of Insurance (a) Details of previous losses and claims (b) if any other Insurance 
Companyhas earlier declined to insure the property and the special condition imposed by the 
other insurers; if any.
v. The existence of other insurances.
vi. Full facts relating to the description of the subject matter of Insurance
EXAMPLES OF MATERIAL FACTS
(a) In Fire Insurance: The construction of the building, the nature of its use i.e. whether it is of 
concrete or Kucha - having thatched roofing and whether it is being used for residential purposes 
or as a godown, whether firefighting equipment is available or not.
(b) In Motor Insurance: The type of vehicle, the purpose of its use, its age (Model), Cubic 
capacity and the fact that the driver has a consistently bad driving record.
(c) In Marine Insurance: Type of packing, mode of carriage, name of carrier, nature of goods, the 
route.
(d) In Personal Accident Insurance: Age, height, weight,occupation, previous medical history 
and occupation especially if it is likely to increase the chance of an accident. Proclivity of 
substance abuse has to be disclosed as well- eg. alcohol or drug addiction.
(e) Burglary Insurance: Nature of stock, value of stock, type of security precautions taken. The 
above is just indicatory of the type of material facts that must be disclosed. Details of previous 
losses is a material fact that has to be disclosed in all cases.
FACTS, WHICH NEED NOT BE DISCLOSED
(a) Facts of Law: Ignorance of law is not excusable - everyone is deemed to know the law. 
Overloading of goods carrying vehicles is legally banned. The transporter cannot take shelter 
behind the excuse that he was not aware of this provision; in the event of an accident.
(b) Facts which lessen or diminishes the Risk: The existence of a good firefighting system in the 
building.
(c) Facts of Common Knowledge: The insurer is expected to know the areas of strife and areas 
susceptible to riots and of the process followed in a particular trade or Industry. Any fact which 
is known or which, by law, may be presumed to be known to the insurer the insurer is presumed 
to know matters of common notoriety or knowledge, and matters which an insurer, in the 
ordinary course of his business, ought to know.
(d) Facts which could be reasonably discovered: For e.g.the previous history of claims which the 
Insurer is supposed to have in his record.
(e) Facts which the insurer’s representative fails to notice: In burglary and fire Insurance it is 
often the practice of Insurance companies to depute surveyors to inspect the premises and in case 
the surveyor fails to notice hazardous features and provided the details are not withheld by the 
Insured or concealed by him them the Insured cannot be unless inquiry is made, it is not 
necessary to disclose the following facts.Any fact which it is superfluous to disclose by reason of 
an express or implied condition.
(f) Any fact as to which information is waived by the insurer.
(g) Any fact as to which insurer is given sufficient information to put him on inquiry.
TIME OF DISCLOSURE
The duty of disclosure must be observed, from the time of submission of proposal and 
continued throughout the negotiations until the contract is concluded. Any material fact, 
therefore, which, at any stage of negotiations, comes to the knowledge of the proposer assured, 
including any alteration of circumstances which brings into existence of material fact or in 
consequence of which a fact previously immaterial becomes material, must be at once 
communicated to the users.
EFFECT OF NON-DISCLOSURE
Where there has been non-disclosure, whether innocent or fraudulent, sometimes called 
concealment the contract is voidable at the option of the insurer. This is the position where the 
matter is not dealt with by a policy condition. The ground is usually covered by a policy 
condition which may do no more than state the common law rule.
REPRESENTATIONS
Representations are statements made during the negotiations with the object of inducing 
the other party to enter into the contract: they must be distinguished from statements which are 
introduced into the contract, and upon the truth of which the validity of the contract is made to 
depend. Representations may be as to a matter of fact, and, if material must be substantially 
correct. Where there has been misrepresentation it is necessary to decide whether it was 
fraudulent or innocent. A fraudulent misrepresentation is one which was known to be false; or 
which was made without belief in its truth, or recklessly, careless whether it was true or false. 
Fraudulent misrepresentation of a material fact entitles the insurer to avoid the policy. Every 
material fact which the insured ought to know in the ordinary course of business must be stated; 
an innocent misrepresentation of such a fact would entitle the insurer to avoid the policy. This 
must be so, otherwise the duty to disclose material facts and to state them accurately would not 
be correlative.
ACTIVE AND PASSIVE DUTY OF DISCLOSURE
The question here is what method is used to acquire the material information. Two 
different approaches are used in this respect. The first - an “active” duty of disclosure, and the
second approach is characterized as a “passive” duty of disclosure. The former argues that the 
duty to assess what information is material for the insurer rests with the person effecting the 
insurance. On the other hand, a passive duty of disclosure implies that the insurer will have to 
define what information is material through a questionnaire. A passive duty of disclosure implies 
that information not asked for is not material. The common law systems seem mainly to apply an 
active duty of disclosure, but elements of a passive duty of disclosure is found in some countries 
in the form of proposals.
MORAL HAZARDS
Moral hazard is a situation in which one agent decides on how much risk to take, while 
another agent bears (parts of) the negative consequences of risky choices. The person who buys 
insurance is protected against monetary damages. Therefore, he may engage in more risky 
behavior than if he has to bear the risk himself.
Moral hazard can arise in the insurance industry when insured parties behave differently as a 
result of having insurance. There are two types of moral hazard in insurance: ex ante and ex post 
Ex-Ante Moral Hazard - Ed the Aggressive Driver: Ed, a driver with no auto insurance, drives 
very cautiously because he would be fully responsible for any damages to his vehicle. Ed decides 
to get auto insurance and, once his policy goes into effect, he begins speeding and making unsafe 
lane changes. Ed's case is an example of ex-ante moral hazard. As an insured motorist, Ed has 
taken on more risk than he did without insurance. Ed's choice reflects his new, reduced liability.
Ex-Post Moral Hazard - Marie and Her Allergies: Marie has had no health insurance for a few 
years and develops allergy symptoms each spring. This winter she starts a new job that offers 
insurance and decides to consult a physician for her problems. Had Marie continued without 
insurance, she may never have gone to a doctor. But, with insurance, she makes an appointment 
and is given a prescription for her allergies. This is an example of ex-post moral hazard, because 
Marie is now using insurance to cover costs, she would not have incurred prior to getting 
insurance. Insurers try to decrease their exposure by shifting a portion of liability to 
policyholders in the form of deductibles and co-payments. Both represent the amount of money a 
policyholder must pay before the insurance company's coverage begins. Policyholders can often 
opt for lower deductibles and co-payments, but this will raise their insurance premiums.
SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT STUDIES 
UNIT – 2 – INSURANCE MANAGEMENT – SBAA1505
Unit 2 INSURANCE POLICIES
Nature of Life Insurance – Life Insurance Policies – Annuities – Group P o l i c i e s – Master 
Policy -ContractFirstPremium–Renewal–ModeofPremiumPayment–LimitedPeriodPaymentand 
Single Premium – Lapse & Revival – Paid Up Policy – Deferment Period – Nomination & 
AssignmentofPolicy–Bonus-SurrenderValue,GeneralInsurance–ConceptandNeed,Features– Fire 
Policy – Marine Insurance – Motor Vehicle and Third Party Insurance – Health & Mediclaim.
Life Insurance Basics
Life insurance is an agreement between you (the policy owner) and an insurer.Under the terms of a 
life insurance policy, the insurer promises to pay a certain sum to a person you choose (your 
beneficiary) upon your death, in exchange for your premium payments.Proper life insurance 
coverage should provide you with peace of mind, since you know that those you care about will be 
financially protected after you die.
Uses of life insurance
One of the most common reasons for buying life insurance is to replace the loss of income that would 
occur in the event of your death.
When you die and your paychecks stop, your family may be left with limited resources.
Proceedsfromalifeinsurancepolicymakecashavailabletosupportyourfamily
almost immediately upon your death.
Life insurance can pay any debts that you may leave behind.
Life insurance can pay off mortgages, car loans, and credit card debts, leaving other 
remaining assets intact for your family.
Life insurance proceeds can also be used to pay for final expenses and estate taxes.
Finally, life insurance can create an estate for your heirs.
How Much Life Insurance do you need?
Your life insurance needs will depend on a number of factors, including:
• Whether you’re married
• the size of your family
• the nature of your financial obligations
• your career stage
• your goals.
For example, when you’re young, you may not have a great need for life insurance. 
However, as you take on more responsibilities and your family grows, your need for life 
insurance increases.
Determining Life Insurance Needs
There are tools to help you determine how much coverage you should have.
Your best resource may be a financial professional.
At the most basic level, the amount of life insurance coverage that you need corresponds
directly to your answers to these questions:
1. What immediate financial expenses (e.g.,debt repayment,funeral expenses) would your
family face upon your death?
2. How much of your salary is devoted to current expenses and future needs?
3. How long would your dependents need support if you were to die tomorrow?
4. How much money would you want to leave for special situations upon your death, such as 
funding your children’s education, gifts to charities, or an inheritance for your children?
Since your needs will change over time, you’ll need to continually re-evaluate your need for 
coverage.
Life insurance-concept
Life insurance is a contract under which the insurer (Insurance Company) inconsideration 
of a premium paid undertakes to pay a fixed sum of money on the death of the insured or on the 
expiry of a specified period of time whichever is earlier. In case of life insurance, the payment
for life insurance policy is certain. The event insured against is sure to happen only the time of its 
happening is not known. So life insurance is known as ‘Life Assurance’. The subject matter of 
insurance is life of human being. Life insurance provides risk coverage to the life of a person. On 
death of the person insurance offers protection against loss of income and compensate the 
titleholders of the policy.
Meaning of Life Insurance
Life insurance is a contract to a certain sum of money on the death of a person in 
consideration of the certain annuity for his life calculated according to the probable duration of 
life.
A life insurance is a contract in which one party agrees to pay a given sum of money upon the 
happening of a particular event contingent upon the duration of human life in consideration of 
immediate payment of smaller sum.
Features of life insurance plans 
(a) Waiver of premium. This feature pays the premium of a policy if you become seriously ill 
or disabled.
(b) Accelerated death benefit. This feature allows you to receive cash advances against the 
death benefit of your policy if you're diagnosed with a terminal illness. Many people with 
this benefit use the money to help pay for treatment and other expenses when they have only 
a short time to live.
(c) Guaranteed purchase option. With this feature, you can purchase coverage at designated 
future dates or life events without proving you're in good health. 
(d) Long-term care riders. Some life products include this option, which allows you to use the 
benefits of your policy to pay for long-term care in exchange for a reduced life benefit. 
(e) Spouse or child term riders. Life policies with this feature allow you to purchase term life 
insurance for your spouse or dependent child, up to age 26. This option can be a more 
affordable way to purchase coverage if you can't afford separate policies.
(f) Cash value plans. This type of policy pays out upon your death and also accumulates value 
during your lifetime. You can use the cash value as a tax-sheltered investment, as a fund 
from which you can borrow and use to pay the policy premiums later.
(g) Mortgage protection. This feature, typically found on term life policies, will pay your 
mortgage if you die.
(h) Cash withdrawals and loans. Many universal and whole life policies allow you to 
withdraw or borrow money, using the cash value of the policy as collateral. Interest rates 
tend to be relatively low. You can also use the cash value of your life policy to pay your 
premiums if you need or want to stop paying premiums for a period of time. You must pay 
back the loan or your beneficiaries will receive a reduced death benefit.
(i) Survivor support services. Some life policies offer services that provide objective financial 
and legal assistance to beneficiaries.
(j) Employee assistance programs. This feature makes resources available to you for 
problems that can affect your personal and professional life. Resources are usually free and 
help address issues such as substance abuse, stress, marital problems, legal concerns and 
major life events.
Procedure for Taking a Life Policy
1. Procedure for Taking a Life Policy:
Life policy is based on the principle utmost good faith. The procedure-filling in the form is quite 
simple. It is almost like a home industry where the person who wishes to make an investment in the 
form of insurance. The first thing to do is to fill in a proposal form.
The proposal form contains the following details:
(a) Name, nationality, permanent residential address, occupation, nature of duties, present employer’s 
name, length of service, previous employment record, father’s name in full.
(b) Place of birth, date of birth, proof of age and district of birth.
(c) Term of insurance, nature of insurance, type of policy, amount to be insured, mode of premium 
payable — yearly, half-yearly, quarterly and monthly.
d) Personal information regarding height, weight where the life is proposed.
(e) Details of any previous policies whether one or double insurance.
(f) Family history, history of father, mother, brothers, sisters, children.
(g) Information regarding diseases likes epileptics, asthma, tuberculosis, cancer, leprosy, etc.
(h) Information regarding previous records of accident, injury, operation diseases.
2. Medical Examination:
If the applicant has a family history of disease then the investment procedure is more detailed 
and description about permanent immunity and other family diseases have to be given including 
habits, name, income, occupation and salary. A person of normal health almost goes through a 
medical examination as a matter of formality.
3. Medical Report:
The next step after filling-in proposal form is to undergo a medical examination from one of the 
doctors approved by the Life Insurance Corporation. The examination is usually of a routine kind 
where the identification of the applicant, his appearance, measurement, weight, condition of 
teeth, eyes, throat, tongue, ears, and condition of heart, chest, digestion, nerve system and past 
operation is taken into consideration to find out the life span of the individual.
4. Agent’s Report:
The third step consists of a report which is confidential in nature. It is made by the agent who is 
underwriting the life of the person. His report consist of the age of the person insuring himself, 
his health, occupation, soundness of payment of premium, proper health and longevity of life.
5. Acceptance of Proposal:
The Life Insurance Corporation accepts the proposal of the insurer on the commitment made by 
the agent and after taking into consideration the doctor’s medical report. The factors which play 
a dominating role is the mode of premium, type of policy, the age of the applicant, his health, 
occupation and habits.
Once these factors have been considered and the Life Insurance Corporation’s officers are 
satisfied, the form is accepted. An investor’s form will be rejected only if he suffers from serious 
diseases or the longevity of life cannot be guaranteed.
6. Proof of Age:
The next step after accepting the proposal of a person is to ask him to submit the proof the age.
The person who is interested in insuring himself may give this proof by submitting any of the 
following documents:
(a) A copy of a certificate giving details of the school leaving examination with age or date of 
birth stated therein;
(b) Municipal records;
(c) Original horoscope prepared at the time of birth, if no proof of age is available;
(d) In the case of uneducated families, entry in the family record through birth registers;
(e) Employer’s Certificate’
(f) Any other satisfactory proof.
7. Mode of Premium:
When an investor takes a life policy on his portfolio he must pay some installment to the life 
insurance company for this investment. This installment is called premium and may be paid 
periodically.
It may be paid annually, half-yearly, quarterly or monthly. Usually, a period of 30 days is given 
as grace beyond the due date of payment of premium. The rates of premium are different for 
different kinds of policies offered as investment.
8. Issue of Policy:
When all these formalities are completed the Life Insurance Corporation sends a life policy to 
the insured. This legal document between the life company and the insured states the details of 
the policy.
It gives details regarding the age, address, sum assured, type of policy with or without profits, 
date of maturity, premium, mode of payment of premium, name of person who is entitled to 
receive the ultimate sum, amount at the termination of the policy, the surrender value of the 
policy, the settlement of claims of policy and all other conditions of the contract.
Principles of Life Insurance
(a) Insurable interest -The insured must have insurable interest in the life assured. In 
absence of insurable interest, Contract of insurance is void. Insurable interest must be present at 
the time of entering into contract with insurance company for life insurance. It is not necessary 
that the assured should have insurable interest at the time of maturityalso.
(b) Utmost good faith- The contract of life insurance is a contract of utmost good faith. 
The insured should be open and truthful and should not conceal any material fact in giving 
information to the insurance company, while entering into a contract with insurance company. 
Misrepresentationorconcealmentofanyfactwillentitletheinsurertorepudiatethecontractifhe wishes 
to do so.
(c) Not a contract of indemnity-The life insurance contract is not a contract of
indemnity. Contract of life insurance is not a contract of indemnity. The loss of life cannot be
compensated and only a fixed sum of money is paid in the event of death of the insured. So, the 
life insurance contract is not a contract of indemnity. The loss resulting from the death of life 
assured cannot be calculated in terms of money.
Importance of Life Insurance
Life Insurance is of great importance to individuals, groups, business community and general 
public. Some of the main benefits of life insurance are given below.
(a) Protection against untimely death Life - Insurance provides protection to the 
dependents of the life insured and the families of the assured in case of his untimely 
death.The dependents or family members get a fixed sum of money in case of death
of the assured.
(b) Saving for old age - After retirement the earning capacity of a person reduces. Life 
insurance enables a person to enjoy peace of mind and a sense of security in his/her
old age.
(c) Promotion of savings - Life insurance encourages people to save money 
compulsorily. When a life policy is taken, the assured is to pay premiums regularly to 
keep the policy in force and he cannot get back the premiums, only surrender value
can be returned to him. In case of surrender of policy, the policyholder gets the
surrendered value only after the expiry of duration of the policy.
(d) Initiates investments - Life Insurance Corporation encourages and mobilizes the 
public savings and channelizes the same in various investments for the economic 
development of the country. Life insurance is an important tool for the mobilization 
and investment of small savings.
(e) Credit worthiness - Life insurance policy can be used as a security to raise loans. It 
improves the credit worthiness of business
(f) Social Security - Life insurance is important for the society as a whole also. Life 
insurance enables a person to provide for education and marriage of children and for 
construction of house. It helps a person to make financial base for future.
(g) Tax Benefit - Under the Income Tax Act, premium paid is allowed as a deduction 
from the total income under section80C.
Life insurance Policies
Life insurance policies can be grouped into the following categories:
(a) Term Policy-In case of Term assurance plans, insurance company promises the insured for a 
nominal premium to pay the face value mentioned in the policy in case he is no longer alive
during the term of the policy. Term assurance policy has the following features:
• Itprovidesariskcoveronlyforaprescribedperiod.Usuallythesepoliciesareshort-term plans 
and the term ranges from one year onwards. If the policyholder survives till the end of this 
period, the risk cover lapses and no insurance benefit payment is made to him.
• The amount of premium to be paid for these policies is lower than allot her life
insurance policies. As savings and reserves are not accumulated under this policy, it has no 
surrender value and loan or paid-up values are not allowed on these policies.
• This plan is most suitable for those who are initially unable to pay high premium
• When income is low as required for Whole Life or Endowment policies,but requires life 
cover for a high amount.
(b) Whole Life Policy- This policy runs for the whole life of the assured. The sum assured 
becomes payable to the legal heir only after the death of the assured. The whole life policy can be 
of three types.
(i) Ordinary whole life policy – In this case premium is payable periodically throughout 
the life of the assured.
(ii) Limited payment whole life policy – In this case premium is payable for a specified 
period (Say 20 Years or 25 Years) Only.
(iii) SinglePremiumwholelifepolicy–Inthistypeofpolicytheentirepremiumispayable in one 
single payment.
(c) Endowment Life Policy-In this policy the insurer agrees to pay the assured or his nominees a 
specified sum of money on his death or on the maturity of the policy whichever is earlier. The 
premium for endowment policy is comparatively higher than that of the whole life policy. The 
premium is payable till the maturity of the policy or until the death of the assured whichever is 
earlier. It provides protection to the family against the untimely death of the assured.
(d) Health insurance schemes - An individual is subject to uncertainty regarding his health. He 
may suffer from ailments, diseases, disability caused by stroke or accident, etc. For serious cases 
the person may have to be hospitalized and intensive medical care has to be provided which can 
be very expensive. It is here that medical insurance is helpful in reducing the financial burden. 
These days the vulnerability to lifestyle diseases such as heart, cancer, neurotic, and pollution 
based, etc are on the increase. So it makes sense for an individual to go for medical insurance 
cover.
(e) Joint Life Policy- This policy is taken on the lives of two or more persons simultaneously. 
Under this policy the sum assured becomes payable on the death of any one of those who have 
taken the joint life policy. The sum assured will be paid to the survivor(s).For example,a joint life 
policy may be taken on the live so husband and wife, sum assured will be payable to the survivor 
on the death of the spouse.
(f) With Profit and without Profit Policy-Under with profit policy the assured is paid, in
addition to the sum assured, a share in the profits of the insurer in the form of bonus. Without 
profit policy is a policy under which the assured does not get any share in the profits earned by 
the insurer and gets only the sum assured on the maturity of the policy. With profit and without 
profit policies are also known as participating and non–participating policies respectively.
(g) Double Accident Benefit Policy - This policy provides that if the insured person dies of any 
accident, his beneficiaries will get double the amount of the sum assured.
(h) Annuity Policy - Under this policy, the sum assured is payable not in one lump sum payment 
but in monthly, quarterly and half-yearly or yearly installments after the assured attains a certain
age. This policy is useful to those who want to have a regular income after the expiry of a certain 
period e.g. after retirement. Annuity is paid so long as the assured survives. In annuity policy 
medical check-up is not required. Annuity is paid so long as the assured survives.
(i) Policies for Women - Women, now days are free to take life assurance policies. However, 
somespeciallydesignedpoliciessuittheirneedsinauniquemanner;importantpoliciesforwomen are
A. Jeevan Sathi is also known a Life Partner plan where the husband and wife arecovered 
under this endowment policy
B. Jeevan Sukanya
(j) Group Insurance - Group life insurance is a plan of insurance under which the lives of many 
persons are covered under one life insurance policy. However, the insurance on each life is 
independent of that on the other lives. Usually, in group insurance, the employer secures a group 
policy for the benefit of his employees. Insurer provides coverage for many people under single 
contract.
(k) Policies for Children - Policies for children are meant for the various needs of the children 
such as education, marriage, security of life etc. Some of the major children policies are:
(1) Children’s deferred assurances
(2) Marriage endowment and educational annuity plans
(3) Children endowment policy
(l) Money Back Policy- In this case policy money is paid to the insured in a number of separate 
cash payments. Insurer gives periodic payments of survival benefit at fixed intervals during the 
term of policy as long as the policyholder is alive. The contract for the life insurance starts with 
the proposal made by the proposer in standard application form available with insurance
company and then various other documents are prepared.
(m) Unit Linked Insurance Plan - This is one of the most sort after type of life insurance policy 
today.This is because ULIPs provide the basic life insurance element as well as a flexible
investment element too. With ULIP plans, the premium paid is split toward two causes, one is of 
course the life insurance component, wherein the insured person’s family receives a sum assured 
in case of his or her demise within the tenure of the ULIP plan. The other component of the 
premium is directed towards investment opportunities in the equity or debt markets. ULIPs offer 
theinsuredpersonareturnoninvestmentsimilartothatofamutualfundandthefinancialsecurity against 
his death that other life insurance policies provide.
Contract First Premium
An insurance contract commences when the life insurance company issues a first premium 
receipt (FPR). The FPR is the evidence that the policy contract has begun. ... The policy 
document is the most important document associated with insurance. It is evidence of the 
contract between the assured and the insurance company.
What Are Premium Payments?
Sally, who plans to purchase life insurance,. Sally's agent indicated that she has flexibility when it 
comes to how often she pays her policy premium. Premium payment represents the cost of the 
insurance policy and Sally wants some advice on which policy to select, how often to pay her 
premium and policy provisions. 
Modes of Premium Payment
Mode refers to the frequency with which a policy owner makes premium payments. If Sally decides 
to purchase insurance, she could pay her premiums:
 Annually
 Semi-annually
 Quarterly
 Monthly
An annual payment would require Sally to pay her premium once a year. This would be the most 
affordable option for her, since the insurance company wouldn't spend as much time and money 
processing payments. While this option would be best from a cost perspective, Sally would have to 
determine if she can afford to pay this premium all at once.
If Sally chose a semi-annual payment, then she would pay her premium every six months (twice a 
year). Her premium payments would be a bit higher than if she chose an annual payment frequency, 
but it might be easier for her to budget for two smaller payments instead of one larger one.
A quarterly payment would require Sally to make a payment every three months (four payments a 
year). Sally would find it easier to budget for four smaller payments, but her policy premium would 
be higher.
A monthly payment would require Sally to pay a premium every month (twelve times a year). This 
option would be the best for Sally's budget as she would pay a smaller amount every month. 
However, it would likely have the highest policy premium, since the insurance company would need 
to process these twelve payments per year.
Limited payment period life insurance plans are such plans that permit an individual to pay the 
premiums for a limited period of time say 5, 10 or 15 years but offers full insurance cover for the 
entire policy term. Such policies tread the middle path between regular payment plans and single 
premium policies.
Single premium Policy
A single premium policy is a type of life insurance policy wherein a lump sum is paid 
as premium instead of the yearly, quarterly or monthly form of premium payment.
Difference between Single premium and Regular premium
In the single premium plan, an insurer gets coverage for full term by paying premium amount in 
a lumpsum. Whereas, in regular premium ULIP plan, an insurer needs to pay premiums in 
intervals such as monthly, quarterly, half-yearly or annually for the policy
Lapse of Policy In case of Regular/ Limited premium policies the premium is payable by the 
policyholder at regular intervals during the premium paying term. The premium payment term and 
frequency is shown on the policy certificate. The company allows a grace period of 30 days for 
quarterly, half yearly and yearly frequency and 15days for monthly frequency .regular/limited 
premium policy lapses if the premium is not paid on the due date and during the grace period. If a 
policy is not in the premium holiday period it is necessary to pay premium on the due date or during
the grace period. Depending on the terms and conditions mentioned in the policy document, life 
cover and other benefits payable under the policy cease or are reduced once the policy is lapsed/ 
paid up, however, the policyholder will continue to have the benefit of investment in the respective 
unit funds.
Revival of Lapsed Policy If the policy has lapsed due to non-payment of premiums within the due 
date, the terms and conditions of the policy contract are rendered void, till the policy is revived..A
lapsed policy has to be revived by payment of the accumulated premiums with interest as well as 
giving the health requirements as required. Various types of revivals are as follows:
A. Ordinary Revival If the revival of the policy is effected within 6 months from the due 
of the first unpaid premium no personal statement of health is required and the policy is revived 
on collection of delayed premium along with interest.
B. Revival on Non-medical basis for revival of the policy on Non-medical basis the
amount to be revived should not exceed the prescribed limit of non-medical assurance taken by 
the life assured.
C. Revival on medical basis If a policy cannot be revived under ordinary revival on nonmedical basis it can be revived with medical requirements. The medical requirements will
depend on the amount to be revived.
Deferment Period in Insurance
Benefits are payable to the insured when they become incapacitated and are unable to work for a 
period of time. The deferred period is the period of time from when a person has become unable to 
work until the time that the benefit begins to be paid. Is the time period that you have to wait before a 
claim is paid for insurance policies such as Income Protection and Accident, Sickness and 
Unemployment Insurance For long term income protection policies, typical deferment periods 
are:
 4 weeks
 8 weeks
 13 weeks
 26 weeks
 52 weeks
Some companies also offer 1 day, 1 week and 2 year deferments, however these are less common.
For accident, sickness and unemployment policies, the typical deferment periods are 30, 60 and 90 
days. The longer the deferment period that you choose, the cheaper the premium for the policy will 
be.
Surrender Value of Policy Surrender Value is the amount payable to the policyholder by the 
Insurer, if he/she decides to exit the policy before maturity period. In case of Life Insurance 
Corporation of India Surrender value is payable to the policyholder only after 3 full years 
premiums are paid to the insurance company Guaranteed Surrender Value is the amount 
guaranteed by the insurance company to the policyholder in case of termination of the policy 
before maturity.
What does a Paid policy mean?
 A life insurance policy in which if all the premium payments are complete and the
insured is free of all payment obligations, the policy stays intact until insured’s death or
termination of the policy is called Paid-up policy.
 Deferment Period – Benefits are payable to the insured when they become in capacitated 
and are unable to work for a period of time. The deferred period is the period of time
from when a person has become unable to work until the time that the benefit begins to
be paid.
Surrender value
It is the amount the policyholder will get from Life Insurance Company if he decides to exit 
the policy before maturity.
What happens when a policy is surrendered for cash value?
When a policy is surrendered, the policy owner will receive all of the remaining cash value in the 
policy known as the cash surrender value. This amount will generally be slightly less than the total
amount of cash value in the policy because of surrender charges assessed by the policy.
What is Nomination?
The nomination is a right given to the policy holder that authorizes him/her to appoint a person 
(usually a close family member) to receive the benefits in the event of the death of the life assured. The 
person who is appointed by the policyholder to receive the benefit is called a Nominee.
Types of Nominees
Under the life insurance policy, the policyholder nominates a person who is entitled to receive the 
benefits in case something happens to the life assured. Some of the different types of nominees given 
below.
(a) Beneficial Nominees – As per the law, any immediate family member (like spouse, children or 
parents) nominated by the policyholder is entitled to receive the monetary benefits and will be the 
beneficial owner of the claim benefits. It is important to note that only immediate family members can 
be termed as Beneficial Nominees.
(b) Minor Nominees – Many individuals appoint their children as beneficiaries of their life insurance 
policies. Minor nominees (who are less than 18 years of age) are not considered eligible to handle 
claim amounts. For this, the policyholder needs to assign an appointee or custodian. The claim amount 
is paid to the appointee until the minor turns 18.
(c) Non- family Nominees – These types of nominees can be distant relatives or even friends as the 
beneficiary of the life insurance policy.
(d) Changing Nominees – Policyholders can change their nominees as many times as they want, but 
the latest nominee should supersede all previous ones.
What is Assignment?
Assignment of the policy refers to the transfer of rights, title and policy ownership from the 
policyholder to another person or entity. The person involved in assigning/transferring the policy is 
called assignor. And the person/institution to which it is assigned is called the assignee. The 
assignment is categorized under two different types,
(a) Absolute Assignment – Under the absolute assignment, all rights, title and interest are transferred 
by the assignor to an assignee without reversion to the assignor (in case of any event). It shifts the 
ownership of the insurance policy to other parties without any terms and conditions. This assignment is 
usually done for money consideration such as raising a loan, out of love or affection towards family 
members.
(b) Conditional Assignment – It means that the transfer of rights will happen from the assignor to the 
assignee subject to certain terms and conditions. If the conditions are fulfilled, only then the policy will 
be transferred.
Assignment Vs. Nomination in Life Insurance
Parameters Nomination Assignment
Source It is made through mentioning the 
names of the nominees.
It is made through an endorsement on the 
contract policy
Policy Ownership Policy ownership does not 
change under nomination, it 
continues with the policyholder
It involves transferring rights/ownership 
for the assignor(policyholder) to the 
assignee (person/entity)
Purpose It offers the nominee to avail 
claim benefits in case of death of 
the life assured
The life assured will transfer all his/her 
right/ownership of the policy to another 
person/institution.
Consideration Nomination does not support 
consideration.
The assignment might/might not support 
consideration
Witness It is not required in the 
nomination
Without a witness, the assignment will be 
considered in valid.
Right to Sue The nominee cannot sue the 
policyholder of the policy.
Assignee has the right to sue the assignor 
of the policy.
Policy amount The nominee is entitled to avail 
the claim benefits in case of death 
of the life assured.
Assignee is entitled to receive the policy 
money.
Bonus in Life Insurance Policy
In simplest of words, a bonus is an extra amount or reward you receive over and above you base 
salary/ amount. A similar concept aligns with life insurance companies, which make bonus payments 
to their policyholders on a yearly basis beyond the basic sum, assured they are entitled to. This 
additional amount can be either paid out on policy maturity or upon the death of the insured, based 
on your policy terms.
How is Life Insurance Bonus generated?
The premiums paid by policyholders of a life insurance company become a part of its asset pool that 
is utilized for payment of claims in the future. A large portion of these funds is invested in debt 
instruments secured by the government while allocating little to equities.
The insurer’s claim experience and returns on investment together are responsible for profit, which it 
distributes as bonus payments at the end of the financial year. Any excess of assets after the 
company’s assets and liabilities are valued, may also generate an extra amount to be distributed as 
bonus.
Here are a few types of bonuses paid out to insurers:
(a) Simple Reversionary Bonus: Calculated on the sum assured, this bonus amount is declared 
annually even by the best life insurance policy in India and is accrued to the policy every year, till it 
matures or a claim is filed.
(b) Compound Reversionary Bonus: When the previous year’s bonus adds up to the sum assured 
and the next year’s bonus is computed on this consolidated amount, it is referred to as compound 
reversionary bonus. This is because it is calculated as a percentage of the sum assured and all 
bonuses accrued earlier. The calculation is based on compound interest. However, since it is 
reversionary in nature, bonus is payable upon maturity or death of the policyholder as above.
(c )Interim Bonus: Usually, bonus declaration is to be done by the end of a financial year, however 
in cases where the death of the insured or policy maturity happens before that, the life insurance 
company declares an interim bonus. This is because while the policy might have accrued a bonus 
from the last financial year, the maturity or claim date falls between two bonus declaration dates. 
Hence there may be a short duration for which the policy may miss out on the bonus. To ensure that 
the policyholder or their beneficiaries are not at a disadvantage, a bonus is added on a pro rata basis 
as per interim bonus rates announced by the insurer.
(d) Cash Bonus: An insurance company might decide to dole out the yearly bonus accrued in cash to 
its policyholders when the year ends. Also known as cash bonus, it is calculated as a percentage of 
the annual premium and gives the insured an advantage in terms of receiving the bonus in hand as 
cash year on year unlike accruing it till maturity.
(e)Terminal Bonus: A one-time bonus also referred to as persistency bonus is paid by the best life 
insurance policy in India to the policyholder for running the policy for a determined period as per the 
insurer’s discretion. It is paid only when the policy matures or upon the death of the insured. Policies 
which have been surrendered or acquire paid-up value are excluded. This bonus is dependent on the 
performance of the policy over the years and is subject to the insurer declaring it, in order to benefit 
policyholders.
How is Life Insurance Bonus calculated?
Bonus is either computed as a percentage of sum assured or as a certain amount per ₹1000 of sum 
assured. For example, if the bonus is ₹ 50 per ₹1000 for a policy with a sum assured of ₹ 1 lakh, the 
annual bonus will be ₹ 5000. For a policy term of 10 years, the simple reversionary bonus comes out 
to be ₹ 50,000. The bonus rate is dependent on several factors such as return on company assets, 
bonuses declared in the previous year, claims filed, expected interest rates in the future and several 
other estimates.
It is important to note that bonus is paid only to policyholders of a participating life insurance 
policy. This applies to traditional plans such as endowment or money back plans. However, even 
such policies may sometimes forego the bonus to offer guaranteed addition to the insured, disclosed 
clearly upon purchase. Read the policy documents carefully when buying a life insurance plan and 
confirm the benefits offered by the insurer including the bonus, if any.
General insurance – Introduction
General insurance is the insurance of assets, financial assets included. If, due to a contingency which 
is covered under the plan, there is an economic loss, the loss is compensated by general insurance 
policies.
Top advantages of general insurance plans
General insurance plans are beneficial because of the following reasons –
 The plans cover financial losses and compensate you for the losses that you suffer. As such, general 
insurance plans provide you financial security even in the case of contingencies
 In some cases, general insurance plans are mandatory by law. For instance, motor insurance plans are 
mandatory as per the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988. Similarly, if you are travelling to Schengen 
countries, you mandatorily need a valid overseas health insurance plan. When you buy such 
mandated plans, you fulfill the legal obligation and save yourself from violation offence.
 General insurance plans help in protecting your savings in emergency situations. You can, therefore, 
use your savings to fulfill your financial goals.
 Health insurance plans, which are a type of general insurance plan, allow you tax benefits. The 
premiums paid for such plans are allowed as a deduction under Section 80D. This deduction helps in 
lowering your taxable income which, in turn, lowers your tax liability and helps you save tax.
Types of general insurance plans
There are a lot of general insurance plans available in the market. However, the popular and the most 
important ones are as follows –
Health insurance
Health insurance plans cover the medical expenses which you incur if you fall ill or are injured and 
need medical assistance. Since the cost of medicine is very high, health insurance plans prove very 
beneficial. They pay for the medical expenses thereby saving your finances from the strain of the 
costs incurred on your treatments.
Features of health insurance plans
Here are some of the common features of health insurance plans –
 Health plans can be taken to cover yourself as well as your family members
 Expenses incurred on room rent, surgery, nurse’s fees, doctor’s fees, ambulance, day care treatments, 
etc. are all covered under health insurance plans
 The premiums paid are allowed as a deduction. You can claim a deduction of up to INR 1 lakh by 
paying health insurance premiums for yourself, your family and dependent parents.
 There are different types of health insurance plans available in the market. These include the 
following –
- Individual health plans which cover a single individual
- Family floater plans which cover the whole family
- Senior citizen plans which cover senior citizens
- Critical illness plans which cover specified critical illnesses
- Disease specific plans for specific diseases
- Top-up and super top-up plans for supplementing an existing coverage
- Hospital cash plans which pay a daily benefit in case of hospitalization
Certain benefits offered under Health Insurance Plans are:
- Pre & Post Hospitalization Benefit
- Cashless Treatment
- Day Care Treatment, etc.
You can also opt for additional Riders along with a Comprehensive Health Insurance Policy to 
enhance your health insurance plan even better. This may include,
- Room Rent Waiver
- Maternity Cover
- Critical Illness cover
- Hospital Cash
- Personal Accident Rider, etc.
Health Insurance is divided into 4 categories which includes comprehensive health insurance, family 
floater cover, surgery cover and individual cover.
Motor insurance
Motor insurance plans are general insurance plans for vehicles. These plans are mandatory as per law 
and have to be bought for every vehicle so that the vehicle is allowed to run on Indian roads.
Features of motor insurance plans
 There are two types of policies available in the market – third party liability and comprehensive
 Third-party plans are legally mandatory while comprehensive plans are voluntary
 Third-party plans cover only the financial liability suffered if you harm any individual or third party 
property
 Comprehensive plans also cover the damages suffered by your vehicle itself
 There are different motor insurance policies covering cars, two-wheelers and commercial vehicles
Motor Insurance category includes
(a) Car Insurance - The smartest thing to secure your car financially is by buying a car 
insurance policy. This would save your finances if your car meets with an accident, or 
falls prey to any natural disaster like floods, earthquake, theft, etc. There are 2 types 
of car insurance policy:
(i)Third Party Liability Car Insurance is nothing but the coverage guaranteed to the third party only 
i.e. Damage to another person’s vehicle or property, bodily injuries and permanent disability during 
an accident by your vehicle. It is a mandatory over as per the law. We wouldn’t recommend you to 
buy this basic third-party insurance if you really love your car from the bottom your heart. This type 
of coverage is best for people who think motor insurance is mandatory and buy this type just for the 
heck of it.
(ii)Comprehensive Car Insurance is an optional coverage and thus is not mandatory. This type of 
car insurance provides coverage for third-party and also for your car. It is best for those who want to 
cover the losses due to the accidents and also to recover losses due to theft and natural disasters, and 
not for those who take car insurance merely as a mandatory clause.
(b) Two Wheeler Insurance: There is nothing exciting than riding your bike wherever you 
wish to. Because for many, their two-wheeler is their personality. This makes it very 
important to insure your two-wheeler. Buying two-wheeler insurance would save your 
money against the financial losses if your bike was damaged in an accident or say, 
robbed. There are two types of two-wheeler insurance policy:
(i)Third Party Two Wheeler Insurance is nothing but the coverage guaranteed to the third party only 
.i.e. to another person's vehicle or property, bodily injuries and permanent disability during an 
accident by your two-wheeler and is mandatory by law. We wouldn’t recommend you to buy this 
basic third-party insurance if you really love your two-wheeler from the bottom your heart. This type 
of coverage is best for people who think two-wheeler insurance is mandatory and buy this type just 
for the heck for it.
(ii) Comprehensive Two Wheeler Insurance is an optional coverage and thus is not mandatory. 
This type of insurance provides coverage to third-party, to you as well as your vehicle. It is best for 
those who want to cover the losses due to the accidents and also to recover losses due to theft and 
natural disasters, and not for those who take two-wheeler insurance merely as a mandatory clause.
There are certain perks of buying motor insurance which includes personal accident cover, cashless 
services at network garages, roadside assistance, towing support, etc.
Fire insurance
Fire insurance policies cover the damages caused by fire and other related perils. The policy covers 
damages suffered by property or specified assets.
Features of fire insurance plans
 The policy covers the cost of repairs or replacement of the insured asset when it is damaged by fire 
or related perils
 There are different types of fire insurance policies which include the following –
 Valued policy
 Floating policy
 Specific policy
 Comprehensive policy, etc.
 A fire insurance plan also covers damages suffered due to lightning, floods, storms, cyclones, 
inundation, impact damage, missile testing operations, etc.
 If any third party property is damaged due to fire or other covered perils, the policy would cover such 
losses too
 There are various extensions which are available under fire insurance plans. These extensions come 
at an additional premium. You can add as many extensions that you like to enhance the coverage.
Marine Insurance
Marine insurance is also known as Cargo Insurance. It covers any loss or damage due to cargo, 
terminals, ships and other transport or cargo through which any property is acquired, transferred or 
is held between two points that can be the origin and the destination point. The various types of 
Marine Insurance includes,
(a) Cargo insurance
(b) Hull insurance
(c) Freight insurance
(d) Liability insurance, etc.
Travel Insurance
Travel insurance would help you tackle all the travel and medical contingencies while you travel 
abroad. It is utmost important to add travel insurance to your checklist while you plan your 
vacation, be it for leisure or business. Travel insurance is gaining back all its lost significance.
The main reasons to buy a Travel Insurance is to avoid unforeseen conditions like
Flight delay
Loss of baggage
Loss of passport
Medical emergencies
Emergency dental expenses
Hospital cash allowance
Accidental death
Hijack distress allowance
Financial emergency assistance, etc.
Other than the benefits listed above, it also offers coverage for expenses to take the insured's 
mortals back to the home country and many more.
Travel Insurance Category includes:
International Travel Insurance
Student Travel Insurance
Group Travel Insurance
Senior Citizen Travel Insurance
Domestic Travel Insurance
Asia Travel Insurance
Corporate Travel Insurance
Home Insurance
A home offers the peace, serenity and warmth that you may be looking for after a tiring day at 
work. Therefore, buying a home insurance is utmost important. It offers protection to the entire 
structure of your house and ensures utmost security for all the belongings that you may collected 
over the years. There are certain home insurance policies that offer coverage till 5 years. You would 
have to pay a premium based on the value of the belongings in your home.
Home Insurance Covers the Structure and Content of your home from below
Fire and Peril Cover:
Due to Fire, Explosion
Aircraft Damage
Lightning
Earthquake
Missile Testing Operations
Natural Calamities:
Flood
Hurricane
Storm
Landslide and Rockslide
Cyclone, etc.
Man Made Calamities
Riot
Strike
Theft or Burglary
Home insurance, however, doesn't include loss or damage due to nuclear perils, any consequential 
loss, damage due to war, damage or any loss due to pollution, contamination, etc. Also, valuables 
like bullion, gold and silver are not covered, however, if you wish to, then you can certainly opt for 
a special cover.
Rural Insurance
Rural insurance helps to fulfill the requirements of rural and agricultural businesses which is the 
base of rural insurance. The motive of this type of general insurance is to ensure that working 
capital as well as assistance is offered to the rural families. This can be done in the form of income 
generating assets.
Rural Insurance includes
Livestock such as goat, sheep, cattle, etc.
Agricultural pump sets
Plantation like grapes, rubber trees
Sub-Animals including silkworm, honeybee, etc.
Commercial Insurance
Commercial insurance is a type of general insurance that is usually offered to entities which are 
commercial like industries, businessmen, etc. It offers insurance cover to different business related 
requirements.
Commercial insurance provides insurance cover to industries like:
Aviation
Foods and beverages
Oil and gas
Textiles
Telecom
Construction
Logistics sectors
Pharmaceuticals
Automotive, etc.
The various types of commercial insurance include:
Marine insurance
Liability insurance
Energy insurance
Employee benefits insurance
Financial lines insurance
Engineering insurance
Property insurance
International insurance solutions.
There is a list of various other types of general insurance products. They are crop insurance, 
corporate insurance, fire insurance, householder, shopkeeper, personal accident, property insurance, 
etc.
 UNIT – 3 – INSURANCE MANAGEMENT – SBAA1505
SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT STUDIES
UNIT 3 INSURANCE CONTRACT
Nature of Insurance Contract – Features of Insurance Contract –Types of 
Insurance – Concept of Intermediaries – Market Players and their Roles –
Agents, Brokers, and Surveyors &Loss Assessors – Health Third Party 
Administrators – Certification of Insurance Professionals, Training 
Organizations.
Meaning of Insurance Contract
A contract of insurance is an agreement whereby one party, called the insurer, undertakes, in return for an agreed 
consideration, called the premium, to pay the other party, namely the insured, a sum of money or its equivalent in kind, upon
the occurrence of a specified event resulting in a loss to him. The policy is a document which is an evidence of the contract of 
insurance.
Definition of Insurance Contract
As per Anson, a contract is an agreement enforceable at law made between two or more persons by which rights are acquired 
by one more persons to certain acts or forbearance on the part of other or others. 
The Indian Contract Act, 1872, sets forth the basic requirements of a Contract. As per Section 10 of the Act: “All agreements
are contracts if they are made by the free consent of parties competent to contract, for a lawful consideration and with a 
lawful object, and are not hereby expressly declared to be void…..”. 
An Insurance policy is also a contract entered into between two parties, viz., the Insurance Company and the Policyholder 
and fulfils the requirements enshrined in the Indian Contract Act.
Essentials for a Valid Contract
(a)Proposal -In Insurance parlance, a Proposal form (also called application for insurance) is filled in by the person who 
wants to avail insurance cover giving the information required by the insurance company to assess the risk and arrive at a 
price to be charged for covering the risk (called “premium). 
When a proposal form is submitted, the Customer does not make a proposal, but it is only “invitation to offer”. The insurance 
company, based on the information furnished in the proposal form, assesses the risk (also called underwriting), and conveys 
the decision – if accepted, at what premium and on what terms and conditions. This is also called “counter offer” in insurance 
terminology by the insurance company to the Customer. 
A medical examination is also conducted, where necessary, before making the counter offer. Where the insurance company 
cannot accept the risk, the proposal is declined. Where the insurance company conveys its decision to accept the risk quoting 
a premium, a proposal is made.
(b) Acceptance - When the Customer accepts the terms of the offer and signifies his assent by paying the First Premium (the 
amount payable as the consideration), the proposal is accepted by the Customer. A proposal of the insurance company (terms 
of offer), when accepted by the Customer, becomes a promise.
(c)Consideration – The amount equal to First Premium paid by the Customer becomes the consideration for the contract. 
This first premium would be the first instalment premium (either first annual, quarterly, half yearly or monthly premium.
In the case of monthly premiums normally 2 monthly premiums are collected along with the Proposal form. In the case of 
single premium, one lump sum is paid along with the Proposal. 
Every promise and every set of promises, forming the consideration for each other, is an agreement;
(d) Competency to Contract - In the case of Insurance the person with whom the Contract is entered into is called 
“Policyholder” or “Policy Owner” who could be different from the subject matter which is insured. In Life insurance 
contracts, for example, the person whose life is insured could be different. 
For example, the Policyholder could be the Father and the Life assured could be the son. In the case of Fire insurance, the 
Policy owner could be the Owner of a building and the subject matter of insurance would be the building itself. 
The Policyholder must have attained the age of majority at the time of signing the proposal and should be of sound mind and 
not disqualified under any law. However, the life assured could suffer from the above infirmities.
(e) Free Consent - Two or more person are said to consent when they agree upon the same thing in the same sense. Both the 
insurance company and the Policyholder must agree on the same thing in the same sense. The Policy document issued to the 
Policyholder (“Customer”) clearly defines the obligations of the insurer and the terms and conditions upon which the 
Insurance contract is issued. 
Consent is said to be free when it is not caused by –
1, Coercion, 
2. Undue influence, 
3. Fraud, 
4. Misrepresentation, 
5. Mistake 
The third and fourth grounds which vitiate consent are more relevant in insurance. Insurance contracts are based on the 
principles of ‘utmost good faith’. The Policyholder is expected to disclose about the status of his health, family history, 
income, occupation or about the subject matter insured truthfully without concealing any material fact to enable the 
underwriter to assess the risk properly. 
In case it is established by the insurance company that the Policyholder did not truthfully disclose any fact in the Proposal 
form which had a material impact on the decision of the underwriter, the insurance company has a right to cancel the 
contract. 
(f) Lawful object: Every agreement of which the object or consideration is unlawful is void. The object of an insurance 
contract, i.e. to cover the risk by taking out an insurance policy, is a lawful object. The consideration or object of an 
agreement must be lawful, 
The consideration or object of an agreement is unlawful under the following circumstances: 
(a) Where a contract is forbidden by law or 
(b) Where the contract is of such nature that, if permitted, it would defeat the provisions of any law or is fraudulent; 
(c) Where the contract involves or implies, injury to the person or property of another; or 
(d) Where the Court regards it as immoral, or opposed to public policy. 
Every agreement of which the object or consideration is unlawful is void. The object of an insurance contract, i.e. to cover the 
risk by taking out an insurance policy, is a lawful object.
(g) Agreement must not be in restraint of trade or legal proceedings: Every agreement by which anyone is restrained 
from exercising a lawful profession, trade or business of any kind, is to that extent void. Every agreement, by which any party 
thereto is restricted absolutely from enforcing his rights under or in respect of any contract, by the usual legal proceedings in 
the ordinary tribunals, or which limits the time within which he may thus enforce his rights, is void to the extent.
(h) Agreement must be certain and not be a wagering contract: Agreements, the meaning of which is not certain, or 
capable of being made certain, are void. Agreements by way of wager are void; and no suit shall be brought for recovering 
anything alleged to be won on any wager, or entrusted to any person to abide the result of any game or other uncertain event 
on which may wager is made.
Anson defined wager as “a promise to give money or money’s worth upon the determination or ascertainment of an uncertain 
event”. 
For example, if A agrees to pay B Rs.1,000, if it rains tomorrow, it becomes a gambling, since there is no certainty that it will 
rain tomorrow. 
A wagering contract is void, it is not illegal. Further a contingent contract is defined under Section 31 of the The Indian 
Contract Act, 1872. Act as “a contract to do or not to do something, if some event collateral to such contract, does or does not 
happen”. 
For example, A contracts to pay B Rs.10,000 if B’s house is burnt. This is a contingent contract. An insurance contract is a 
contingent contract and the example given above is nothing but Fire insurance. While all Wagering contracts are Contingent 
contracts, Section 30 of the The Indian Contract Act, 1872 has declared all Wagering contracts to be void.
Features of Insurance Contract
(a)Aleatory -Insurance contracts are aleatory. This means there is an element of chance and potential for unequal exchange 
of value or consideration for both parties. An aleatory contract is conditioned upon the occurrence of an event. 
Consequently, the benefits provided by an insurance policy may or may not exceed the premiums paid. For example, an 
individual who has a disability insurance policy will collect benefits if she becomes disabled. However, if no disability 
strikes,benefits are not paid. Both insurance and gambling contracts are typically considered aleatory contracts.
(b) Adhesion -Insurance contracts are contracts of adhesion. This means that the contract has been prepared by one 
party (the insurance company) with no negotiation between the applicant and insurer. In effect, the applicant 
“adheres” to the terms of the contract on a “take it or leave it” basis when accepted. Any confusing language in a 
contract of adhesion would be interpreted in favor of the insured. The purpose is to correct any advantage that may result 
for the party who prepared the contract. A policy of adhesion can also be described as one which the insurance company 
can modify.
(c)Utmost Good Faith-Insurance is a contract of utmost good faith. This means both the policy owner and the insurer must 
know all material facts and relevant information. There can be no attempt by either party to conceal, disguise, or deceive. A
consumer purchases a policy based largely on the insurer and agent’s explanation of the policy’s features, benefits, and 
advantages. Insurance applicants are required to make a full, fair and honest disclosure of the risk to the agent and 
insurer. Concepts related to utmost good faith include warranties, representations, and concealment. These represent grounds 
through which an insurer might seek to avoid payment under a contract.
(d) Executory-An executory contract is one in which the covenants of one or more parties to the contract remain partially or 
completely unfulfilled. Insurance contracts necessarily fall under this strict definition; of course, it's stated in the insurance 
and agreement that the insurer will only perform its obligation after certain events take place (in other words, losses occur).
(e) Unilateral -Insurance contracts are unilateral. This means that only one party (the insurer) makes any kind of 
enforceable promise. Insurers promise to pay benefits upon the occurrence of a specific event, such as death or disability. 
The applicant makes no such promise. In fact, the applicant does not even promise to pay premiums. The insurer cannot 
require the premiums to be paid. Of course, the insurer has the right to cancel the contract if premiums are not paid.
(f) Conditional -An insurance contract is conditional. This means that the insurer’s promise to pay benefits depends on the 
occurrence of an event covered by the contract. If the event does not materialize, no benefits are paid. Furthermore, the 
insurer’s obligations under the contract are conditioned on the performance of certain acts by the insured or the beneficiary. 
For example, the timely payment of premiums is a condition for keeping the contract in force. If premiums are not paid, the 
company is relieved of its obligation to pay a death benefit.
(g) Personal contract -Life insurance is a personal contract or personal agreement between the insurer and the insured. The 
owner of the policy has no bearing on the risk the insurer has assumed. For this reason, people who buy life insurance 
policies are called policy owners rather than policyholders. Policy owners actually own their policies and can give them away 
if they wish. This transfer of ownership is known as assignment. To assign a policy, a policy owner simply notifies the 
insurer in writing. The company will then accept the validity of the transfer without question. The new owner is granted all of 
the rights of policy ownership
(h) Warranties and Representations-A warranty in insurance is a statement made by the applicant that is guaranteed to be 
true in every respect. It becomes part of the contract and, if found to be untrue, can be grounds for revoking the contract. 
Warranties are presumed to be material because they affect the insurer’s decision to accept or reject an applicant.
A representation is a statement made by the applicant that they consider to be true and accurate to the best of the 
applicant’s belief. It is used by the insurer to evaluate whether or not to issue a policy. Unlike warranties, representations are 
not a part of the contract and need be true only to the extent that they are material and related to the risk. Statements made by 
applicants for insurance are considered to be representations and not warranties.
(i) Misrepresentation and Concealments- A misrepresentation is a statement, whether written or oral, that is false. 
Generally speaking, in order for an insurance company to void a contract because of misrepresented information, the 
information in question must be material to the decision to extend coverage. 
Concealment, on the other hand, is the failure to disclose information that one clearly knows about. To void a contract on the 
grounds of concealment, the insurer typically must prove that the applicant wilfully and intentionally concealed information 
that was of a material nature. 
(j)Fraud - Fraud is the intentional attempt to persuade, deceive, or trick someone in an effort to gain something of value. 
Although misrepresentations or concealments may be used to perpetrate fraud, by no means are all misrepresentations and 
concealments acts of fraud. For instance, if an insurance applicant intentionally lies in order to obtain coverage or make a 
false claim, it could very well be grounds for the charge of fraud. However, if an applicant misrepresents some piece of 
information with no intent for gain (such as, for example, failing to disclose a medical treatment that the applicant is 
personally embarrassed to discuss), then no fraud has occurred.
(k) Impersonation (False pretenses) - When one person assumes the identity of another for the purpose of committing a 
fraud, that person is guilty of the offense of impersonation (also known as false pretenses). For instance, an individual that 
would likely be turned down for insurance coverage due to questionable health might request a friend to stand in for him (or 
her) in order to complete a physical examination.
(l) Parol (or Oral) evidence rule - This principle limits the effects that oral statements made before a contract's execution 
can have on the contract. The assumption here is that any oral agreements made before the contract was written were 
automatically incorporated into the drafting of the contract. Once the contract is executed, any prior oral statements will 
therefore not be allowed in a court of law to alter or counter the contract.
Types of insurance
The following are the various types of insurance businesses recognised under the Insurance Act, 1938: 
(a) Life insurance business - Life insurance business covers the risk of contingencies dependent on human life. For example 
payment of an amount (called “sum assured”) on the death of the life assured. Further, annuity contracts (which provide for 
periodic payments to life assured as long as the policyholder is alive) or the provisions of accident benefits also form part of 
life insurance business.
(b) General insurance business (also called “Non-Life” business) - All businesses other than Life are classified as General 
insurance business.
This is sub divided into the following 3 sub-categories: 
(i) Fire insurance business- Fire insurance, as the name suggests covers the risks associated with loss due to a fire accident 
to properties.
(ii) Marine insurance business -Marine insurance means the business of effecting insurance contracts upon vessels of any 
description, including cargoes, freights and other interests which may be insured for transit by land or water or both and 
includes warehouse risks or similar risks incidental to such transit.
(iii) Miscellaneous insurance business- Miscellaneous insurance include all insurance businesses other than 
Fire and Marine insurance business (and Life insurance business). It includes Motor, Liability, Health and 
Burglary insurances. Generally, indemnity based health insurance policies (which reimburse hospitalisation 
expenses) were classified under the General insurance business. Under the Insurance Bill, Health insurance 
business has been categorised as a separate line of business than the General insurance business. Standalone 
health insurance companies have been licensed by IRDA to sell only health insurance policies, given the huge 
potential for this business.
Concept of intermediaries
A basic definition defines an intermediary as ‘action between two parties - mediatory’ or 
‘situated or occurring between two things - intermediate’. The latter form refers more to a 
position within a process or level of achievement. The former, by contrast, refers to an 
intermediary as an agent in some form, as ‘one who acts between others - a do-between or 
mediator’, or as ‘something acting between things persons or things’. As actors then, what 
intermediaries do is mediate, they work in-between, make connections, enable a relationship 
between different persons orthings.
Indeed, in common parlance the meaning implied by the concept intermediary tends to refer to a 
neutral player trying to mediate between different sets of interests. The assumption of neutrality 
is however, problematic. Rather than focus on everything as an intermediary, the interesting 
question is to ask in what ways, where, when and how particular things, people, organisations 
etc. are/ become defined as ‘intermediaries. Further still, there is the question of the active role 
that intermediaries play in defining the relationship between otheractors.
In Insurance industries, an insurance intermediary is a person or a company that helps you in 
buying insurance. Insurance intermediaries facilitate the placement and purchase of insurance, 
and provide services to insurance companies and consumers that complement the insurance 
placement process. Traditionally, insurance intermediaries have been categorized as either 
insurance agents or insurance brokers.
Role of Intermediaries in Insurance Industry
As players with both broad knowledge of the insurance marketplace, including products, prices 
and providers, and an acute sense of the needs of insurance purchasers, intermediaries have a 
unique role – indeed many roles – to play in the insurance markets in particular and, more 
generally, in the functioning of national and international economies.
Intermediary activity benefits the overall economy at both the national and international levels: 
The role of insurance in the overall health of the economy is well-understood. Without the 
protection from risk that insurance provides, commercial activities would slow, perhaps grinding 
to a halt, thus stunting or eliminating economic growth and the financial benefits to businesses 
and individuals that such growth provides.
The role of insurance intermediaries in the overall economy is, essentially, one of making 
insurance – and other risk management products – widely available, thereby increasing the 
positive effects of insurance generally – risk-taking, investment, provision of basic societal needs 
and economic growth.
There are several factors that intermediaries bring to the insurance marketplace that help to 
increase the availability of insurance generally:
Innovative marketing - Insurance intermediaries bring innovative marketing practices to the 
insurance marketplace. This deepens and broadens insurance markets by increasing consumers’ 
awareness of the protections offered by insurance, their awareness of the multitude of insurance 
options, and their understanding as to how to purchase the insurance they need.
Dissemination of information to consumers - Intermediaries provide customers with the 
necessary information required to make educated purchases/ informed decisions. Intermediaries 
can explain what a consumer needs, and what the options are in terms of insurers, policies and 
prices. Faced with a knowledgeable client base that has multiple choices, insurers will offer 
policies that fit their customers’ needs at competitive prices.
Dissemination of information to the marketplace - Intermediaries gather and evaluate 
information regarding placements, premiums and claims experience. When such knowledge is 
combined with an intermediary’s understanding of the needs of its clients, the intermediary is 
well-positioned to encourage and assist in the development of new and innovative insurance 
products and to create markets where none have existed. In addition, dissemination of knowledge 
and expansion of markets within a country and internationally can help to attract more direct 
investment for the insurance sector and relatedindustries.
Sound competition - Increased consumer knowledge ultimately helps increase the demand for 
insurance and improve insurance take-up rates. Increased utilization of insurance allows
producers of goods and services to make the most of their risk management budgets and take 
advantage of a more competitive financial climate, boosting economic growth.
Spread insurers’ risks - Quality of business is important to all insurers for a number of reasons 
including profitability, regulatory compliance, and, ultimately, financial survival. Insurance 
companies need to make sure the risks they cover are insurable – and spread these risks 
appropriately – so they are not susceptible to catastrophic losses. Intermediaries help insurers in 
the difficult task of spreading the risks in their portfolio. Intermediaries work with multiple 
insurers, a variety of clients, and, in many cases, in a broad geographical spread. They help 
carriers spread the risks in their portfolios according to industry, geography, volume, line of 
insurance and other factors. This helps insurers from becoming over-exposed in a particular 
region or a particular type of risk, thus freeing precious resources for use elsewhere.
Reducing costs - By helping to reduce costs for insurers, broker services also reduce the 
insurance costs of all undertakings in a country or economy. Because insurance is an essential 
expense for all businesses, a reduction in prices can have a large impact on the general economy, 
improving the overall competitive position of the particular market. Of course, the insurance 
cycle of “hard” and “soft” markets can have a significant impact on the benefits – both good and 
bad – of increased availability. Generally, however, increased availability benefits the consumer 
by leading to product competition, price competition, and improved services. By reducing 
insurance costs across markets, intermediaries make an important contribution to improving the 
economic conditions in acountry.
Market Players and theirRoles
There are many market players in insurance industries i.e.
a. Agents
b. Brokers
c. Surveyors & LossAssessors
d. Health Third PartyAdministrators.
The role of various players of insurance market is being discussed hereby:
(a)Insurance Agent
Insurance agent is the salesperson of the insurer. An agent is one who is licensed under Section 
42 of the Insurance Act, 1938, and who receives or agrees to receive payment by way of 
commission or remuneration in consideration of his soliciting or procuring insurance business 
including business relating to the continuance, renewal or revival of policies of insurance.
[Sec. 2 (10) of Insurance Act, 1938.] In simple words, we can say that an insurance agent is a 
licensed representative of the insurer who agrees to work for the insurer in exchange of 
commission or remuneration. He plays a promotional job.
Functions of Insurance Agent:
To solicit and procure new business: An agent is bound to obtain certain specified amount of 
new business as required under the rules. He should always make effort in getting new insurance 
proposals beyond his prescribed limit.
To conserve the present business: In addition to procuring new business, he should ensure the 
continuation of the policies already issued and prevent them from lapsing on account of default 
in the payment ofpremium.
Assist in selection of suitable policy: The agent should give proper guidance and help to the 
prospects in selection of a suitable policy, keeping in view the needs of the proposed by guiding 
him.
To enquire into full details of prospects : It is an important duty of the insurance agent to 
enquire into all the requisite information from the prospective insured. This becomes necessary 
to ascertain the extent of risk.
Inform the agency about the factors which can cause damage to insured : It is the duty of an 
agent to inform the agency about all the related information which can influence the insurance 
policy by any means.
Assuring the age of insured : It is the duty of an agent to assure date of birth of an insured at 
the time of starting the policy. This helps in future settlements ofpolicies.
To motivate the policy holders to pay premium in time: It is the duty of an agent to inform 
the insured to pay premium in time and get benefits of payments by avoiding penalties applicable 
in latepayments.
To prevent the policy from lapsing: Agent should inform the disadvantages of policy lapse to 
the insured.
Inform the insured for appointing nominee(s): It is the duty of an agent to make sure that the 
nominees column is filled by the insured. This helps in future settlements of policies without any 
ambiguity.
To prepare the necessary documents : This proposer has to submit other important documents 
like birth certificate, medical certificate, etc. The agent can help the proposer by guiding him.
Other important duties of an agent:
1. Inform about the policies to theinsurer.
2. By knowing the requirements of prospects, providing him the best suitablepolicy.
3. Working hard withhonesty.
4. Introducing himself as an insurance agent, and if asked, to show hisI.D.
5. If asked by the insured, telling him about the rate ofcommission.
6. Calculating the amount of premium which is payable by theinsured.
7. Explaining the details of insurance application form to theprospect.
8. Informing the prospects about the refusal of insurance application by the insuranceagency.
9. Following the rules and regulations of insuranceauthority. 
10.Providing insurance bond to the insured within 45 
days.Role of an InsuranceAgent
An insurance agent represents the insurer with whom he or she is attached. He solicits or 
procures insurance business only for such insurer. The responsibilities of an insurance agent 
broadly include thefollowing:
(a) Perform Need analysis for the customer – The agent is expected to sell the products of the 
insurance company, which suit the needs of the customer. For this purpose he has to analyse the 
needs of the customer, such as Insurance protection for family, Asset protectionneeds,
Children’s marriage or education needs, Health insurance, Pension etc. Depending on the needs 
and the stage of the life cycle of the customer, the appropriate product of the insurer which suits 
the customer is recommended
(b) Explain the product benefits, premiums, exclusions and other terms and conditions so that the 
customer can take an informeddecision
(c) Assist the customer in getting the requisite documents for the purpose of seeking an 
insurance cover and clarify the doubts of the customer in the proposal form fillingprocess
(d) Bring to the notice of the insurer any adverse habits of the customer which will have a 
bearing on the insurer’s decision to accept a risk
(e) Inform the customer about the decision of the insurer to issue a policy orotherwise
(f) Provide assistance to customer at various stages of policy servicing and when a claim ismade
Qualification and training
Most insurance companies and independent firms prefer to hire young graduates who hold 
degrees in business or economics. Generally, companies do not prefer non-graduates for this 
post. However, there are certain exceptions to this condition. In case a non-graduate has previous 
work experience or has proven expertise in any business areas can be employed as an insurance 
agent.
Experience in sociology and public speaking can prove as a benefit for the candidate to improve 
their sales skills. Proficiency insoftware and computer are significantly essential for an 
insurance agent as an educational, advertising, and communicationaltool.
While the criteria to become an insurance agent may differ from one company to another, all 
companies demand a candidate to acquire a license from IRDAI. To receive a license, applicants 
need to clear an examination and undergo pre-licensing training related to insurance practicing 
and laws.
Skills
A candidate who is conducting a job search in the insurance field needs to possess a specific skill 
set. Insurance is all about marketing and selling the right products to the clients.
This type of job requires a candidate to have excellent communication skills, need to be wellorganized and possess the ability to analyse the customer’s requirements. This will help an 
insurance agent to suggest the insurance policy that will fulfill their insurance needs effectively.
Individuals interested in becoming insurance agents will need to undertake training with an 
insurance company regarding its products and insurance regulations and laws.
An insurance agent needs to have the ability to demonstrate and listen carefully to the prospect. 
He/she should have the ability to take complex information and convert it into simple language 
that anyone can understand. This is another skill that most insurance companies look into a 
candidate.
Insurance agent’s functions are mainly based on demonstrating, communicating, and convincing 
powers. An insurance agent with proficiency in these features has enormous scope to make a 
successful career in this field.
TYPES OF INSURANCE AGENTS:
The following are the different types of Insurance Agents recognized under the Regulations:
(a) IndividualAgent
(b) CorporateAgent
(c) Micro InsuranceAgent
Individual Agents
IRDA (Licensing of Insurance Agents) Regulations, 2000 as amended from time to time, 
contains provisions relating to licensing of individual Insurance Agents. The following are the 
different types of licencesissued within theRegulations:
(a) DirectLife
(b) Direct NonLife
(c) Composite Licence (both Life and Non-Life)
The following are the pre-requisites for a candidate intending to get a licenceissued (common for 
all types ofagents):
(a) Minimum qualifications: The minimum qualifications prescribed are a pass in 12th standard 
or equivalent examination conducted by a recognised Board/Institution. This condition is relaxed 
to a pass in 10th standard for applicants residing in a place where the population is not less than 
5,000 (‘Ruralagents’)
(b) The applicant must not suffer from the following disqualifications:
a. That the applicant is notminor
b. That he is not found to be of unsound mind by a Court of competentjurisdiction
c. That he has not been found guilty of criminal misappropriation or criminal breach of trust or 
cheating or forgery or an abetment of or an attempt to commit any offence by a Court of 
competent jurisdiction and five years have not elapsed from the date ofconviction
d. That he has been found guilty of or has knowingly participated in or connived at any 
fraud, dishonesty or misrepresentation against an insurer or an insured during the courseof:
(i) Any judicial proceeding relating to any policy of insurance(or)
(ii) Winding up of an insurance company(or)
(iii) In the course of investigation of affairs of aninsurer
(e) That he does not violate the code of conduct prescribed under the Regulations
(c) Practical Training: The applicant shall undergo a minimum of 50 hours practical training on 
insurance related matters in life or general insurance business, as the case may be, spreading to 1 
to 2 weeks. Where the application is for a composite licence, the training shall be 75 hours 
spread over 3 to 4 weeks covering both life and general insurance subjects. Where the applicant 
holds special qualifications such as membership of Institute of Chartered Accountants of India, 
Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of India, Institute of Company Secretaries of India, 
Insurance Institute of India or the Institute of Actuaries of India or a Masters degree in Business 
Administration of any institution recognised by Central Government or State Government, it is 
sufficient if the training is undergone for 25 hours (35 hours if the licenceis composite). The 
training can be undergone in any of the IRDA accredited traininginstitutions
(d) Examination: Every applicant shall undergo a pre-recruitment examination in life or general 
insurance business or both, as the case may be, conducted by the Insurance Institute of India or 
any other body authorised byIRDA.
(e) AML & ULIP training: In addition to the above, the insurer with whom the agent is 
attached provides a special training on Anti money laundering (under the IRDA’s Anti money 
laundering Guidelines dated 31 March 2006) for all Insurance Agents. Training in Unit Linked 
Insurance Products (ULIP) is compulsory for life insurance agents before they are allowed to sell 
ULIPs on behalf of a life insurer (under the IRDA (Linked Insurance Products) Regulations, 
2013)
(f) Payment of fees of Rs.250 along with the application for grant of licence enclosing proof of 
age, qualifications, training andexamination.
Renewal of licence
A licence is issued for a period of three years at a time. At the end of the third year, the licence is 
required to be renewed. The following are the conditions for renewal of licence:
(a) Completion of practical training for 25 hours for Life or General insurance, as the case may 
be or 50 hours for renewal of composite agency licence
(b) Payment of fees of Rs.250 towards renewal of licence. If the application for renewal does not
reach atleast 30 days before the due date for renewal, an additional fee of Rs.100 by way of 
penalty is payable. If the application for renewal reaches after the expiry of licence, IRDA may 
consider the application for renewal upon imposition of a penalty ofRs.750.
(c) Maintenance of a minimum persistency of 50% during the licence period (as per IRDA’s 
persistencyguidelines.
(d) The Agent does not suffer from any of the disqualifications mentioned in the previoussection
(e) Renewal training on Anti-money laundering as may be prescribed by the insurer from time to 
time
Authorization to sell for one insurer at a time
A licence issued under the provision of the above Regulations entitles an Insurance Agent to sell 
on behalf of one life insurer or one General insurer at a time. An identity card is issued by the
concerned Insurer for this purpose. An Agent is entitled to change insurer but has to follow the 
process laid down in IRDA’s circular on issue of a ‘No objection Certificate” by the insurers.
Corporate Insurance Agent
Corporate entities represent an insurance company and sell its policies. ... When a bank 
becomes the corporate agent of an insurance company it is referred to as a bancassurance 
arrangement or partnership. Banks offer insurance policies to their customers based on their 
knowledge of their situation and needs.
Licensing of Corporate Agents
The IRDA (Licensing of Corporate Agents) Regulations, 2002 provides the licensing framework 
for Corporate Agents similar to the Regulations applicable to Individual Agents. The Corporate 
Agents regulations recognize agents who are one of the following entities (as against individual 
agents who are licensed under the IRDA (Licensing of Insurance Agents) Regulations, 2002):
(a) Firm
(b) Company under the Companies Act,1956
(c) Bankingcompany
(d) Co-operative society
(e) Panchayat or local authority
(f) Non-Government organisation
The licence is issued to the entity as against the individual under licensing of individual agents. 
However, the persons who are authorised to sell on behalf of a Corporate Agent will have to 
undergo the training and examination requirements similar to that of an Individual agent.
The Corporate agent shall have the following persons at the minimum as per the Regulations:
(a) Corporate Insurance Executive (‘CIE’) (b) Specified Persons (‘SP’) A Corporate 
Insurance Executive is the Director or Partner or one or more of its officers or employees 
so designated by it (where the applicant is a Company or a Firm). Where the applicant is 
any other person, the Chief Executive or one or more of his employees designated by him 
shall be the CIE. In either case, the CIE shall possess the minimum qualifications, 
undergo the practical training and pass the required examination.A Specified Person is
responsible for soliciting or procuring insurance business on behalf of the Corporate 
Agent entity. He may be a Director or a Partner or one or more of its officers or other 
employees so designated by the Corporate Agent. The individual desirous of acting as a 
Specified Person shall also possess the requisite qualifications, undergo the practical 
training and pass the examination. A Certificate is issued to a Specified Person which 
authorises him to solicit or procure insurance business on behalf of the Corporate Agent. 
There may be as much number of Specified Persons as the Corporate Agent requires 
depending upon the business requirements. The minimum qualifications, practical 
training and examination requirements are similar to that of an individual agent. A 
Corporate Agent is also allowed to act for only one life insurer (Direct-Life) or one 
general insurer (Direct-Non-Life) or Composite Corporate Agent (one Life and one 
General at atime)
As per the IRDA guidelines on Corporate Agents, dated 14 July 2005, two types of 
Corporate Agents are recognized:
(A) Exclusive Corporate Agents – i.e. those entities whose primary activity is solicitation 
or procuration of insurance business. Such entities shall be Public Limited companies 
under the Companies Act, 1956, with a minimum paid up capital of Rs.15 lakhs 
deposited in a Scheduled Commercial Bank. Further entities belonging to Banking or 
Insurance Groups alone are allowed to form Exclusive CorporateAgencies
(B) Non-exclusive Corporate Agents – entities which are already engaged in some other 
business and would like to take up insurance agency as a subsidiary activity. Further a 
Group to which the applicant Corporate Agent belongs to, can be granted only one 
corporate agency licence. In other words, any proposal from an applicant, some of whose 
group entities are already engaged in insurance business, such as corporate agent, broker, 
insurer etc., shall not be normally granted a corporate agency licence. IRDA does not 
normally grant any exception unless the entities are licensed by Reserve Bank of India 
with substantial client base or otherwise have assets, turnover or net worth of Rs.15 
Crores.
Requirements for becoming a Corporate Agent:
(a) Formation or existence of an entity as required under the Regulations asabove
(b) Identification of persons possessing the minimum qualifications to become a CIE or 
SP (a minimum of 1 CIE and 2 SPs are normally insisted by IRDA at the time of 
licensing). The actual number of persons will depend on the business plan of the 
applicant corporate agent. CIEs or SPs can also be changed or added (in addition to 
minimum)subsequently
(c) Document evidencing constitution of the Corporate agent entity (e.g. Memorandum 
and Articles of Association) shall contain “procuring or solicitation of insurancebusiness” 
as one of the mainobjects
(d) Proof of CIE and SPs having undergone the practical training and passed the required 
examination
(e) Either CIE or one of the SPs must possess one of the following additional 
qualification:
(i) An Associate/Fellow of the Insurance Institute of India,Mumbai.
(ii) an Associate/Fellow of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India, New Delhi; 
with diploma in Insurance and RiskManagement.
(iii) an Associate/Fellow of the Institute of Costs and Works Accountants of India, 
Calcutta;
(iv) an Associate/Fellow of the Institute of Company Secretaries of India, NewDelhi;
(v) an Associate/Fellow of the Actuarial Society of India,Mumbai;
(vi) possessing Certified Associate ship of Indian Institute of Bankers(CAIIB)
(vii) MBA (Two year) Course / PG Diploma (One year) course in Insurance from Amity 
School of Insurance & Actuarial Science,Noida
(viii) PG Diploma (One year) course in Insurance from Institute of Insurance and Risk 
Management,Hyderabad
(ix) MBA (Two year) course in Insurance from National Insurance Academy,Pune
(x) PGMBA (Two Year) course in Insurance from National Law University,Jodhpur
(xi) PGMBA (Two year) course in Insurance from MET,Mumbai
(xii) MBA (Two year) course in Insurance from Birla Institute of Management 
Technology, Noida the persons with above qualifications (except at (a) shall undergo a 
“Workshop for Insurance executives” at National Insurance Academy, Pune orInsurance
Institute of India, Mumbai or Institute of Insurance and Risk Management, Hyderabad as 
prescribed by the Authority.
(f) In the case of exclusive Corporate Agencies, proof of formation of a public company, 
injection of a capital of Rs.15 lakhs and depositing the money into aBank
(g) Fee of Rs.250 for issue of licence to the Corporate Agent and Rs.500 for issue of 
Certificate for each Specified person Renewal of licence. A license is issued for a period 
of 3 years and shall expire at the end of the term, unless renewed. The annual fee to the 
Authority in such manner as may be specified by the regulations for renewal of an 
individual agency license. The conditions for renewal of licence for a corporate agent is 
similar to that of an individual agent, including maintenance of a minimum persistency of 
50%
Micro Insurance Agent
Micro insurance Agents are a special category of insurance agents who support financial 
inclusion, i.e. the distribution of financial services at an affordable cost to the masses. Micro 
insurance contracts are typically low sum assured contracts which provide for the sum assured to 
be paid either on death – both natural and accidental, or an Endowment (which also provides a 
sum assured on maturity in addition to death) or a health insurance.
Only a Non-Governmental organisation or a Self Help Group Micro Finance Institutions or 
Associations not formed for Profit are entitled to become Micro Insurance Agents. Such Agents 
can distribute the products of one life insurer or one general insurer or both. A Micro insurance 
agent shall employ Specified persons with the prior approval of the Insurer to distribute the 
micro insurance products on its behalf. All the Micro insurance agents and their Specified 
persons shall be imparted 25 hour training by the insurer in local vernacular language in the areas 
of insurance selling, policyholder servicing and claimsadministration.
A Micro insurance agent can sell only a Micro insurance product and not any other type of 
insurance products. However an Agent who is licensed to sell all products of an insurer can sell 
the Micro insurance products of such insurer, if any. An Insurance Broker who can sell any 
product of any insurer, can sell Micro insurance products of any insurer as well.
All Micro insurance policies may be reckoned for the purpose of fulfillment of social obligations 
of an insurer pursuant to the provisions of the Insurance Act and Regulations. Where a micro
insurance policy is issued in a rural area and falls under the definition of social sector, such 
policy may be reckoned for both under rural and social sectorobligations as well.
Insurance Broker
Regulation 2(i) of the IRDA (Insurance Brokers) Regulations, 2002, defines Insurance Broker as 
a person for the time being licensed by the Authority under Regulation 11, who for remuneration 
arranges insurance contracts with insurance companies and/or reinsurance companies on behalf 
of his clients. Licensing of Insurance Brokers Every Insurance Broker shall possess a valid and 
subsisting licence to act as an Insurance Broker issued by IRDA. The framework for licensing of 
an Insurance Broker is similar to that of a Corporate Agent. However, as we have seen earlier a 
Broker differs from an Agent in the sense that a Broker represents customers interests and is 
required to select the best product amongst all insurance companies, while an agent represents an 
insurer at any point in time (one in life and one in general insurance) and will present the product 
of only such insurer(s) with whom the agent is attachedwith.
Categories of Insurance Brokers
(a) Direct Broker(Life)
(b) Direct Broker(General)
(c) Direct Broker (Life &General)
(d) Reinsurance Broker (Reinsurance Life orGeneral)
(e) Composite Broker (Life and/or General + Reinsurance)
A Direct Broker is authorised to recommend the products of any of the life insurance companies 
or general insurance companies to their clients, as the case may be.
A Reinsurance broker arranges for reinsurance contracts between direct insurers and reinsurance 
companies.
Reinsurance is a contract under which insurance companies can pass on the risk they assume 
under the policies issued by them, to yetanother insurance company (called reinsurer). Therefore, 
the insurance company which issues the policy becomes the Policyholder under the reinsurance 
contract entered into with a reinsurer.
A broker can be an intermediary who can arrange reinsurance contracts with reinsurance 
companies.
Except for GIC, the National Reinsurer, all the other reinsurance companies doing business in 
India are located abroad. Therefore the role of reinsurance brokers in getting a best deal for 
insurance companies cannot be undermined.
A Composite Broker is one who arranges for both insurance contracts both for retail and 
institutional clients as a Direct Broker as well as for insurance companies as a reinsurance 
broker.
Role of an Insurance Broker Regulation 3 of the IRDA (Insurance Brokers) Regulations, 
2002 summarises the functions of a Direct Broker:
(a) Since a Broker represents a client, he is expected to obtain detailed information on client’s 
business and risk management philosophy and familiarise himself with the client’sbusiness
(b) Render proper advice to the client in selecting the appropriate insurance as well as terms of 
insurance
(c) Possessingadetailedknowledgeofinsurancemarketstobeinapositiontoadvicehisclient
(d) Submitting quotation received from insurance companies for consideration of aclient
(e) Providing the information required about the client or the subject matter to be insured, to 
enable insurer to properly assess the risk and give a premiumquotation
(f) Updating customer about the progress of the proposal submitted and providing written 
acknowledgements
(g) Assisting clients in paying premiums under Section 64VB of the Insurance Act,1938
(h) Assisting clients in negotiation of claims and maintenance of claimrecords
Regulation 4 lists down the functions of a Reinsurance Broker:
(a) Familiarising himself about the client’s business and risk retentionphilosophy
(b) Maintaining clear records of insurer to assistreinsurers
(c) Rendering advice based on technical data on the reinsurance covers available in the 
international insurance and the reinsurancemarkets
(d) Maintaining a database of available reinsurance markets including solvency ratings of 
individualreinsurers
(e) Rendering consultancy and risk management services forreinsurance
(f) Selecting and recommending a reinsurer or a group ofreinsurers
(g) Negotiating with a reinsurer on client’sbehalf
(h) Assisting in the case of commutation of reinsurance contracts placed withthem
(i) Acting promptly on instructions from a client and providing it written acknowledgement and 
progressreports
(j) Collecting and remitting premiums and claims within such time as agreedupon
(k) Assisting in the negotiation and settlement of claims
(l) Maintaining proper records ofclaims
(m) Exercising due care and diligence at the time of selection of reinsurers and international 
reinsurance brokers having regard to their respective security rating and establishing respective 
responsibilities at the time of engaging theirservices
The person entitled to become an Insurance Broker can be an individual, firm, a Company under 
the Companies Act, 1956; a Co-operative Society registered under the Co-operative Societies 
Act, 1912 or under any other law for the registration of Co-operative Societies or such other 
persons as IRDA recognises to act as an insurance broker.
Normally, IRDA encourages only Companies to take up Insurance Broking.
Requirements for licensing of an Insurance Broker
(a) Application for broking licence, duly filled in and signed by the authorised signatory, along 
with supportingdocuments
(b) Memorandum and Articles of Association shall contain “solicitation or procuring insurance 
business as an Insurance Broker” as the mainobject
(c) Appointment of a Principal Officer who is the Director or the Chief Executive Officer 
appointed exclusively to carry out the functions of an insurance broker. Such a Principal Officer 
is subject to minimum qualifications as prescribed under the Regulations and shall undergo 
theoretical and practical training from IRDA accredited training institutes and has passed the 
examination conducted by National Insurance Academy, Pune or any other examiningbody.
Atleast two employees of the applicant entity who have the minimum qualifications as 
prescribed by the Regulations and has undergone the practical training and passed the 
examination as mentioned above. Only such employees are authorised to solicit or procure 
insurance business on behalf of the insurancebroker.
(d) An insurance broker may have as many numbers of authorized employees fulfilling the above 
conditions, as required depending on the businessplan.
(e) The entity formed shall be solely engaged in the business of insurance broking and no other 
business
(f) The non-resident equity in insurance broking entity shall not exceed26%
(g) Minimum capital requirements for the broking entity: Direct Broker `50 lakhs Reinsurance 
Broker `200 lakhs Composite Broker `250lakhs
(h) A minimum of 20% of the initial capital shall be kept in a Bank deposit which shall not be 
released without the prior approval ofIRDA
(i) A professional indemnity insurance policy shall be taken by the broker as prescribed in the 
Regulations. IRDA may suitable cases allow a newly licensed broker to product the policy 
within 15 months from the date of issue of originallicence
(j) Payment of Registration fee as follows: Category of Insurance Broker Amount of Registration 
fee payable Direct Broker `20,000 Reinsurance broker `25,000 Composite Broker`40,000
(k) Qualifications and Disqualifications The Principal Officer and each of the employees 
authorised to sell on behalf of the Insurance Broker shall possess one of the following minimum 
qualifications:
(a) Bachelor’s or Masters Degree in arts, science or social sciences, engineering or its equivalent, 
law or itsequivalent
(b) Master’s Degree in Business Administration or its equivalent from any institution or 
university
(c) Associate or Fellow of the Insurance Institute of India or Institute of Risk Management or 
Institute of Chartered Accountants of India or Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of India 
or Institute of Company Secretaries of India or Institute of Actuaries of India or a Certified 
Associate of the Indian Institute ofBankers
(d) Such other qualification as may be prescribed by IRDA the Insurance Broker shall not suffer 
from any of the disqualifications which are similar to the disqualifications prescribed for an 
individualagent
(e) The entity formed shall be solely engaged in the business of insurance broking and no other 
business
(f) The non-resident equity in insurance broking entity shall not exceed26%
(g) Minimum capital requirements for the broking entity: Direct Broker `50 lakhs Reinsurance 
Broker `200 lakhs Composite Broker `250lakhs
(h) A minimum of 20% of the initial capital shall be kept in a Bank deposit which shall not be 
released without the prior approval of IRDA (i) A professional indemnity insurance policy shall 
be taken by the broker as prescribed in the Regulations. IRDA may suitable cases allow a newly 
licensed broker to product the policy within 15 months from the date of issue of originallicence
(j) Payment of Registration fee as follows: Category of Insurance Broker Amount of 
RegistrationfeepayableDirectBroker`20,000Reinsurancebroker`25,000CompositeBroker
`40,000 42 PP-IL&P
(k) Qualifications and Disqualifications The Principal Officer and each of the employees 
authorised to the Principal Officer and each of the employees authorised to sell on behalf of the 
Insurance Broker shall possess one of the following minimumqualifications:
(a) Bachelor’s or Masters Degree in arts, science or social sciences, engineering or its 
equivalent, law or itsequivalent
(b) Master’s Degree in Business Administration or its equivalent from any institution or 
university
(c) Associate or Fellow of the Insurance Institute of India or Institute of Risk 
Management or Institute of Chartered Accountants of India or Institute of Cost and Works 
Accountants of India or Institute of Company Secretaries of India or Institute of Actuaries of 
India or a Certified Associate of the Indian Institute ofBankers
(d) Such other qualification as may be prescribed by IRDA The Insurance Broker shall 
not suffer from any of the disqualifications which are similar to the disqualifications prescribed 
for an individualagent
Annual Fee Every Broker shall pay an Annual Licence Fee as follows:
Category of Insurance Broker Amount of annual license fee payable per 
annum
Direct Broker A sum calculated at the rate of 0.50 per cent of 
the remuneration earned in the preceding 
financial year subject to minimum of INR 
25000 and maximum of INR 100000.
Reinsurance broker A sum calculated at the rate of 0.50 per cent of 
the remuneration earned in the preceding 
financial year subject to minimum of INR 
75000 and maximum of INR 300000
Composite Broker A sum calculated at the rate of 0.50 per cent of 
the remuneration earned in the preceding 
financial year subject to minimum of INR 
125000 and maximum of INR 500000
Renewal of licence
A licenceissued to an Insurance Broker is valid for 3 years unless suspended or cancelled before 
the expiry of the 3 year period. The licence shall be renewable for a further period of 3 years 
subject to the following conditions:
(a) Application for renewal has to be submitted 30 days in advance of the date of expiry of 
licence
(b) Additional fee of Rs.100 in case the application reaches after the 30 days but before the 
expiry oflicence
(c) Additional fee of Rs.750 in case the application reaches after the expiry of the licence for 
valid reasons to the satisfaction ofIRDA
(d) Principal Officer and every employee authorised to sell on behalf of the insurance broker to 
undergo 25 hours of theoretical and practical training by IRDA accredited traininginstitutes
Difference between Insurance Agent and Insurance Broker
The basic difference between an Insurance Broker and an Insurance Agent is that while an 
Insurance Broker represents the client, while an Insurance Agent represents the insurance 
company. As a corollary to the above, an Insurance Broker is licensed to recommend the 
products of any insurance company, whereas Insurance Agent at any point in time can sell the 
insurance products of only one insurance company with which he is attached.
Surveyors or a Loss Assessor
A Surveyor or a Loss Assessor is relevant for general insurance business, where assessment of 
the loss of the subject matter insured is very important for deciding the claim amount. As general 
insurance contracts are indemnity contracts in nature, the amount paid by the insurance company 
cannot exceed the amount of actual loss incurred.
The job of the Surveyor or a Loss Assessor is therefore to arrive at the exact amount of loss 
incurred and his role is critical to a general insurer. Every person who is a student-member of the 
Institutes of Surveyors and Loss Assessors intending to act as a Surveyor or Loss Assessor is 
required to be licensed by IRDA before he starts performing his functions for any general
insurer. A licence issued for a Surveyor or a Loss Assessor shall be valid for a period of 5 years 
after which it is required to be renewed.
A Surveyor and Loss Assessor shall be categorized into 3 categories;
The three categories are Licentiate, Associateship and Fellowship which is awarded by the 
Institute of Surveyors and Loss Assessors. The nature of surveyor or loss assessment work which 
can be undertaken would depend upon the categorisation. Further IRDA shall also allot the 
department or the area work for the Surveyor and Loss Assessor from time to time. 
Requirements for issue of a licence for Surveyor or Loss Assessor Regulation 3 of the Insurance 
Surveyors and Loss Assessors (Licensing, Professional and Code of conduct) Regulations, 
2000 specify the requirements for issue of alicence:
(a) He holds a degree in any branch of engineering (or) Post graduate diploma in general 
insurance issued by Institute of Insurance and Risk Management (or) a Degree in Agriculture 
(or)
(b) He is a member of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India or the Institute of Cost and 
Works Accountants of India(or)
(c) He possesses actuarial qualifications or holds a degree or diploma of any recognised 
university or an institute in relation to insurance(or)
(d) He holds a diploma in insurance granted or recognised by the Government(or)
(e) He holds such other technical qualifications as prescribed by IRDA(and)
(f) He does not suffer from any of the disqualifications mentioned in section 42(4) Where the 
entity is a company or a firm, all the directors or partners shall possess one of the qualifications 
as prescribed above and none of the directors or partners suffer from any of the disqualifications 
mentioned as above(and)
(g) Payment of fees based on the categorisation of the applicant(and)
(h) Has undergone practical training as a Student-member under a licensed Surveyor and Loss 
Assessor (who shall be a Fellow or Associate member of the Institute) for a period of 12 months 
as contained in Chapter VII (persons who have more than 15 years experiencein risk 
management and general insurance are exempt from this training)(and)
(i) Has passed the Surveyor examination conducted by the Insurance Institute of India or such 
other institute recognised by IRDA(and)
(j) Has undergone the special training provided by the Indian Institute of Surveyors and Loss 
Assessors for 100 hours for Fellowship, 50 hours for Associate and 25 hours for Licentiate level 
(and)
(k) He attends seminars and workshops organised by the Institute for a minimum number of 
seminars, viz., 10 seminars for fellowship, 8 for Associateship and 5 for Fellowship level Where 
the applicant is a company or firm, all the directors or partners, as the case may be, shall possess 
one or more of the qualifications specified above and does not suffer form any of the 
disqualifications mentioned in Section 42D(4) of the Insurance Act, 1938. Atleast 2 Directors or 
partners shall be members of the institute and shall hold the licence to act as a surveyor and loss 
assessor. The level of membership or the department to which the directors or partners belong to 
shall become the level of membership or the department for the company or firm. Employees of 
the company of the firm, who are licensed as surveyor and loss assessor shall undertake survey 
only in those areas allotted to them based on the level of membership and the department to 
which they are eligible as per their individual licence. However this eligibility is subject to the 
level of membership or the department of the company or the firm (which is dependent on the 
directors/partners eligibility asabove).
The following are the further conditions prescribed:
(a) Foreign equity in the Surveyor and Loss assessor entity shall not exceed26%
(b) Common directors or partners between two Surveyor and Loss assessor entitiesprohibited
(c) One Promoter or Subscriber can have only one Surveyor and Loss assessorlicence
(d) Main objects clause of the deed of constitution shall contain the activity of “to carry our 
insurance survey and lossassessment”
(e) Name of the Company or firm shall contain the words “Insurance Surveyors and Loss 
Assessors”
The Fees payable for issue of licence are as follows:
IRDA, on being satisfied that the applicant is eligible for issue of a licence shall send intimation 
to the applicant together with an identity card mentioning the particular class or category of 
general insurance business, namely, fire, marine cargo, marine hull, engineering, motor, 
miscellaneous and loss of profit, for which the Authority has grantedlicence.
Role of a Surveyor or Loss Assessor
The primary responsibility of a Surveyor or a Loss assessor is to estimate the liability of the loss 
incurred by the Policyholder who has taken an insurance cover, to enable the insurance company 
to arrive at the amount to be indemnified to the Policyholders under the terms of insurance 
contract. The following are the specific duties and responsibilities as enshrined under the 
Regulations:
(a) Declaration of conflicts of interest: In case the surveyor is interested in the subject matter 
under loss assessment or in the policyholder whose subject matter is being assessed, he must 
declare the conflict to the insurer and stay away from the assessment exercise. For example, if 
the Surveyor is the son of the Policyholder whose car has been damaged in a fire accident, such a 
Surveyor cannot assess the loss of the car of his Father, in view of the conflict of interest. He 
must declare this relationship to the insurer concerned and not conduct the survey proceedings in 
suchcases
(b) Maintenance of confidentiality and neutrality in the loss assessment exercise. He has to keep 
the interests of both the insurer and the policyholder inmind
(c) He must investigate the causes and circumstances of the loss inquestion
(d) He must personally conduct a spot survey and comment upon excess insurance or under 
insurance
(e) Advise the insurer about loss minimisation or loss control efforts or security and safety 
measures which can be adopted to ensure that the incidence of loss is reduced or avoided in 
future
(f) Pointing out discrepancy in policy wordings, ifany
(g) Satisfying the queries of the insured or the insurer in connection with the claim orloss
(h) Recommending applicability of depreciation and its percentage andquantum
(i) Commenting on salvage and its disposal either the insurance company or the insured can 
appoint a licensed surveyor for any loss exceeding `20,000, within 72 hours of knowledge of loss 
to the insured. Notice of such appointment shall be sent to the insurance company or the insured, 
as the case may be. The Surveyor and Loss Assessor shall undertake survey only in the 
department for which license was In case there is any dispute or difference by the insured, 
another licensed surveyor shall be appointed to conduct the survey at the cost of the insured. 
Dispute on the quantum of loss may be referred to arbitration. A surveyor shall submit his report 
within 30 days of his appointment. In exceptional cases, the surveyor may seek extension of time 
up to 6 months from the insurer, under intimation to the insured. Where the report is incomplete, 
the insurer may seek additional report within 15 days of submission of the report by the 
Surveyor. Under such circumstances, the Surveyor shall submit the additional report within 3 
weeks of request from theinsurer.
THIRD PARTY ADMINISTRATORS-HEALTH
A Third Party Administrator (‘TPA’) is a person appointed by an insurance company to render 
services in connection with health insurance business or health cover, excluding the insurance 
business of an insurer and soliciting or procuring insurance business directly or through an 
intermediary or an insurance agent.
TPAs are normally engaged to provide services in connection with hospitalisation of an insured 
under a health insurance policy taken through a general insurance company or a standalone 
health insurance company or under health insurance rider covers offered by life insurance 
companies. They also offer certain other services like arranging for medical examination of the 
insuredbeforeapolicyisissuedbyaninsurancecompanyetc.Requirementsforbecominga
TPA A person can act as a TPA only with a valid licence issued by IRDA to perform the 
functions of a TPA.
The requirements for obtaining a licence are as follows:
(a) Entity: The person applying for a licence shall be an entity which is a Company under the 
Companies Act,1956
(b) Primary object: The main object as per the Memorandum and Articles of Association shall be 
to carry on business in India as TPA in the health services. Further engaging in any business 
other than TPA isprohibited
(c) Minimum paid up capital: Rupees One crore and maintenance of working capital of Rs.1 
croreat alltimes.
(d) One of the Directors to be registered with Medical Council: One of the directors of the TPA 
shall be a qualified medical doctor registered with Medical Council ofIndia
(e) Foreign equity restricted to 26%: TPA entity shall not have foreign holdings in excess of 
26%
(f) Transfer of shares in excess of 5%: Prior approval of IRDA necessary before affecting any 
transfer of shares in excess of 5% either through direct transfer or through issue of fresh equity 
shares to new or existingshareholders
(g) Fee: A processing fee of Rs.20,000 shall be payable along with the application. A further sum 
of `30,000 shall be payable as licence fee before the licenceisissued
A licence granted under these Regulations shall be valid for 3 years, after which, upon payment 
of a renewal of `30,000, may be renewed for a further period of 3years.
Intimation of certain changes to IRDA
Every TPA shall inform the appointment of a new Chief Executive Officer (‘CEO’) or Chief 
Administrative Officer (‘CAO’) or a Director on the Board of TPA to IRD within 30 days of 
appointment .
Every TPA shall inform IRDA the details of head office or branch offices closed or relocated 
within 15 days of such closure or relocation
Qualifications of CEO or CAO
Every person proposed to be appointed as a CEO or a CAO of the TPA shall possess the 
following qualifications:
(a) He shall hold a degree in arts, science, commerce or management or health or hospital 
administration ormedicine
(b) A pass in the Associateship examination conducted by the Insurance Institute of India or such 
equivalent examination as decided byIRDA
(c) Completion of 100 hours of practical training with institutions recognized byIRDA
(d) He shall not be of unsound mind or undischarged insolvent or a person who had been subject 
to imprisonment for a period of 3 months by a Court on the grounds of misfeasance, misconduct 
or forgery etc. Decision making on claims by TPAs prohibited A TPA is prohibited from taking 
any decisions on any claims. A TPA can only assess and recommend admission of a claim or 
otherwise based on the guidelines provided by the insurer in terms of the agreement entered with 
them. Once the insurer takes a decision on the claim and communicates it to the TPA, the TPA 
shall clearly state as follows in their communication to the Policyholder who has registered a 
claim: “As per the instructions of the insurer the claim is being settled/denied for Rs. on account 
of . For any further clarifications, you may directly contact theinsurer.”
Bar on Non-insurance healthcare schemes
The TPA shall offer health services only in accordance with the IRDA (Third Party 
Administrators) Regulations, 2001 and shall not provide any services:
(a) directly or indirectly to non-insurance healthcare schemesor
(b) directly to health insurance schemes promoted, sponsored or approved by entitiesnot
(c) being insurance companies, such as Governments, PSU’setc.
(d) directly or indirectly to the policyholder or insured, except the health services as per the 
agreement with theinsurer.
Agreement between a TPA and an Insurance company
a. The insurer and the TPA shall themselves define the scope of the Agreement, the health and 
related services that may be provided by the TPA and the remuneration therefore. Provided that 
there shall be a clause in the Agreement for its termination by either party on grounds of mutual 
consent or any fraud, misrepresentation, inadequacy of service or other non-compliance or 
default fraud. Provided further that, there shall be no element in the Agreement which dilutes, 
restricts or otherwise modifies the stipulations of the IRDA in respect of Policy Holder welfare, 
protection, service standards and turnaround-timeparameters.
b. The remuneration to the TPA shall be based on the services rendered to the insurer and shall 
not be related to the product/policy experience or the reduction of claim costs or loss ratios of the 
insurer.
c. A copy of the Agreement entered into between the TPA and the Insurance Company or any 
modification thereof, shall be filed, within 15 days of its execution or modification, as the case 
may be, with theAuthority.
d. More than one TPA may be engaged by an insurance company and, similarly, a TPA can serve 
more than one insurancecompany
e. The Authority from time to time may prescribe minimum standard clauses to be included in 
the agreement between insurer andTPA.
Change of TPAs for servicing of Health Insurance Policies
a. A change in the TPA by the insurer shall be communicated to the policyholders 30 days before 
giving effect to thechange.
b. The contact details like helpline numbers, addresses, etc. of the new TPA shall be made 
immediately available to all the policyholders in case of change ofTPA.
c. The insurers shall take over all the data in respect of the policies serviced by the earlier TPA 
and make sure that the same is transferred seamlessly to the newly assigned TPA, if any. It shall 
be ensured that no inconvenience or hardship is caused to the policyholders as a result of the 
change.
In this regard, the following aspects shall receive special attention:
i. Status of cases where pre-authorization has already been issued by existingTPA.
ii. Status of cases where claim documents have been submitted to the existing TPA for 
processing.
iii. Status of claims where processing has been completed by the TPA and payment is pending 
with the insurer/TPA.
Data and related issues
a. The TPA and the insurer shall establish a seamless flow of data transfer for all theclaims.
b. The respective files shall be handed over to the insurer within 15 days of the claim settlement 
or rejection.
CERTIFICATION OF INSURANCE PROFESSIONALS AND TRAINING ORGANISATIONS
It would be noted across the IRDA regulations on insurance agents and intermediaries that undergoing training is mandatory 
condition in most of the cases as one of the prerequisites to licensing. The training can be imparted only by IRDA approved 
training institutions. While institutions like Insurance Institute of India, Indian Institute of Risk Management, and National 
Insurance Academy are associated with the insurance industry to provide training inputs on an ongoing basis to the various 
functionaries within the industry, the IRDA accredited training institutes play a major role in training insurance distributors 
like Individual agents, corporate agents, Insurance Brokers etc.
The Salient Features of Instructions as Issued By IRDA for Accredited Training Institutes A Training facility can be provided 
by either IRDA accredited Agents Training Institutes (‘ATIs’) or by the Insurer’s own accredited Training college (which is a
part of the insurance company’s organisation). Further a Training can be provided either offline or online by such Institutes. 
An accreditation is provided to Training Institute by IRDA subject to the following conditions: 
(a) Institutes which are engaged in training for financial / insurance products for more than 3 years are eligible to apply for 
starting an offline/online institute. However this will not apply to in-house institutes of insurers
(b) Only entities registered as Company under the Companies Act and Society and trusts registered under Societies 
Registration Act shall be eligible to apply for accreditation as ATls.
(c )The accreditation will be given on need basis. The existing private ATls will be granted a one-time permission as assessed 
by the Committee to relocate the centers within the state. The existing ATls will also be eligible for reallocation of the centres 
within the state based on the assessments made by the Standing Committee. 
(d) For a new location if more than one private Agents Training Institutes apply for accreditation, internal grading and 
marking system will be applied to give accreditation on merits. The ATls shall register themselves with PF Commissioner 
and scrupulously follow the statutory provisions regarding the contribution of the PF amount to the accounts of the 
employees.
(e) The initial approval will be for a period of 3 years and consideration of further renewal next 3 years would depend on the 
satisfactory compliance of requirements of accreditation. Accreditation of any centre which has not conducted any pre 
recruitment training for one year continuously will be liable for cancellation. For renewal cases the ATIs are required to 
apply with all documents/details 3 months in advance of expiry of accreditation. 
How Training shall be conducted for Distributors The 50 hours training which is normally required to be conducted for all 
Individual Agents, Specified Persons of Corporate Agents and Authorised employees of Insurance Brokers etc., shall be as 
follows: The training shall be based on the books prescribed by the Authority for life insurance i.e. IC-33 and for nonlife 
insurance IC-34. 
(a) The training duration for new license is 7 days minimum including Sundays but excluding national holidays with 8 hours 
per day excluding lunch and tea break applicable for full time batches. 
(b) For the part-time batches the training can be imparted 4 hours daily excluding tea break and the minimum duration of the 
training will be 14 days including Sundays but excluding national holidays. In case of composite training duration are 11 
days & 22 days respectively for full time and part time training.
(c) Any candidate to qualify for the exam must complete 50 hours or 75 hours training as applicable. For renewal of license 
candidate must attend 25 hours training in each stream i.e. life or non-life separately in 4 days or 8 days respectively. Product 
related training and market survey shall not be included in this statutory training. The product training, if any, to be given by 
the insurance company should be conducted separately and over and above the minimum training hours prescribed by the 
Authority.
Attendance
The attendance record of the trainees should be maintained at the Institute for necessary inspection at any given point of time. 
Faculty (a) Every Institute should have at least one qualified permanent full-time faculty for each stream i.e. for Life and 
Non-Life having any of the qualifications as prescribed below:-
1. I 0 years of experience in the managerial cadre with any insurer.
2. The qualified surveyors, Engineers with B.Tech Degree from recognized universities, CA, CS and ICWAl qualified 
professional* 
3. LOMA level 1 Qualification*.
4. Associate from Insurance lnstitute of India*. 
5. Post graduation qualification in insurance provided by university recognised by UGC like PG diploma in insurance, MBA 
in insurance, Associate from CII, London and Diploma from IIRM, Hyderabad*.
6. Qualified students of post graduate diploma in insurance earlier approved by IRDA in year 2003 offered by IRDA 
(a)approved institutes*. 
(b) attendance register of the faculty members should be maintained at the training institutes. 
(c) The record of the payment made to faculty should be maintained at the training institute i.e. batch-wise payment detail 
should be maintained. In case the employment of the faculty is full time, record of monthly wages payment should be 
maintained. All payments to faculty will be made through bank. 
(d) The faculty should provide details of the other Institutes with whom they have been empanelled as parttime/guest faculty.
The faculty must also inform the other Institutes of his/her leaving one institute and joining any other training institute. Any 
change in main qualified permanent faculty must be intimated to the Authority within one month. 
(7) The Agents Training Institutes must impart pre recruitment training to only those candidates who are sponsored by 
insurers by online allotment of training slot and training completion certification on portal. 
(8) The Agents training institutes are permitted to undertake courses on insurance, sponsored by Insurers or being conducted 
by Ill, NIA, IIRM, Actuarial society of India, CII London or any other insurance related training. Agents Training Institute 
must have at least one classroom dedicated for pre recruitment training. 
(9) For the purpose of accreditation of private Agents Training lnstitute the proof of ownership or tenancy of the premises in 
the name of Agent Training institute are sufficient for accreditation. In case of in-house Agents Training institute where the 
training centre is situated in the branch approved by IRDA, copy of IRDA approval of branch is acceptable.
(10) Infrastructure: It is mandatory for every Agent Training lnstitute to have at-least one classroom with a minimum carpet 
area of 200 sq. Feet apart from office room and wash room, dedicated to 50125 hours training. Every Agent Training lnstitute 
must provide one computer for each classroom to practice the online exam mock test. The classroom should have 
comfortable seating arrangements permanently available. 
(11) Batch size the maximum number of candidates permitted in a batch for training will be 40. To reduce the cost of 
training, Agent Training Institutes may include candidates from different insurers in the same batch provided the total 
number does not exceed maximum number of candidates permitted. 
(12) The insurance institute of India shall regularly send their officials to oversee the proper conduct of the training at the 
institutes and would not sponsor candidates to those institutes that are not maintaining the required standards of and facilities 
for the training. In-house training centers will be subject to regular inspections and audit by the insurer concerned in addition 
to inspection by officials of the Authority and 
(13) The training institute must display the certificate of accreditation to impart training issued by the Authority at the 
training institute.
(14)The institute should not allow a franchisee to conduct courses on its behalf, even with the faculty of the Institute. The
institute should conduct the training only on its approved premises with proper infrastructure.
(15) No marketing fee/consultancy fee payment is permitted for getting the training batches. 
(16) It will be the responsibility of the insurance Company to check the status of the institute before sponsoring any 
candidates for training. 
(17) In case of the cities where there are no accredited institutes or the institute is situated 50 Km away an insurance company 
intends to appoint agents, it will be the responsibility of the insurance company to conduct training. The employed faculty 
only of the in-house training centers may impart training at such places. No temporary/guest faculty is permissible for the inhouse training centers of the insurers. The insurers may seek prior approval to conduct such batches from the Authority. 
(18) The Institutes must keep with them one set of original records of the training at the place where the training is being 
imparted. The institute with multiple locations must keep copy of all training records at head office of the institute however 
original record has to be kept at respective center only. 
(19) The Institute should confine its activities generally within 50 KM radius only to the place city for which it has been 
given the approval. No training for the candidates outside the said place city is permitted. If during the course of the 
inspection by the officials of the Authority, it is found that the institute is not maintaining dedicated class-room, the 
accreditation of the institute will stand cancelled without giving any notice.
(20) The institute may ensure that the batch size/batches taken by the institute are commensurate with the infrastructure1 
facilities available and approved by the Institute.
(21) In order to ensure prompt compliance and smooth monitoring all the insurers are advised to nominate a nodal officer at 
corporate level who will be responsible for communicating with Authority in the area of training on the lines of designated 
officers for licensing.
(22) The existing Institutes should report compliance with these instructions within 15 days from the date of issuance of 
these guidelines. The institutes must inform the authority the location and contact details of head office of the institute.
(23) The Insurance companies/ATls are advised to consider the current address of the candidates for nomination to a 
particular location. Training institutes are allowed to admit candidates from the same district where the AT1 is located or any 
other district which shares the boundary with the district of the ATI.
UNIT – 4 –INSURANCE MANAGEMENT – SBAA1505
SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT STUDIES
UNIT 4 REGULATORY ENVIRONMENT
Regulation of Insurance Business – Insurance Act -Insurance regulatory and Development 
Act – Powers and Functions of IRDA, Relevant Regulations and Guidelines issued by 
IRDA, Licensing, Audit & Supervision, Investments, Amalgamation and Transfer, 
Grievance Redressal, Ombudsman – Rural and Social Sector Obligations, Micro 
Insurance, Financial Inclusion.
REGULATION OF INSURANCE BUSINESS IN INDIA
This millennium has seen insurance come a full circle in a journey extending to nearly 200 years. 
The process of re-opening of the sector had begun in the early 1990s and the last decade and 
more has seen it been opened up substantially. In 1993, the Government set up a committee 
under the chairmanship of RN Malhotra, former Governor of RBI, to propose recommendations 
for reforms in the insurance sector. The objective was to complement the reforms initiated in the 
financial sector. The committee submitted its report in 1994 wherein, among other things, it 
recommended that the private sector be permitted to enter the insurance industry. They stated 
that foreign companies beallowed to enter by floating Indian companies, preferably a joint 
venture with Indian partners. Following the recommendations of the Malhotra Committee report, 
in 1999, the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA) was constituted as an 
autonomous body to regulate and develop the insurance industry. The IRDA was incorporated as 
a statutory body in April, 2000. The key objectives of the IRDA include promotion of 
competition so as to enhance customer satisfaction through increased consumer choice and lower 
premiums, while ensuring the financial security of the insurance market. The IRDA opened up 
the market in August 2000 with the invitation for application for registrations. Foreign 
companies were allowed ownership of up to 26%. The Authority has the power to frame 
regulationsunderSection114AoftheInsuranceAct,1938andhasfrom2000onwardsframed
various regulations ranging from registration of companies for carrying on insurance business to 
protection of policyholders’ interests. In December, 2000, the subsidiaries of the General 
Insurance Corporation of India were restructured as independent companies and at the same time 
GIC was converted into a national re-insurer. Parliament passed a bill de-linking the four 
subsidiaries from GIC in July, 2002. Today there are 24 general insurance companies including 
the ECGC and Agriculture Insurance Corporation of India and 23 life insurance companies 
operating in the country.
Beside IRDA Act and Insurance Act, 1938, there are some common Act/Regulation to the 
General and Life Insurance Business in India and some Acts have been made for specific 
requirement of Life Insurance/General Insurance Acts/Regulations common to General and Life 
Insurance Business in India The following Acts regulate the Insurance Business in India.
• Insurance Act,1938
• IRDA Act,1999
• Insurance Amendment Act,2002
• Exchange Control Regulations(FEMA)
• Insurance Co-opSociety
• Indian Stamp Act,1899
•Consumer Protection Act,1986
• Insurance Ombudsman
Regulations governing/ affecting Life Insurance Business in India
The following Acts govern /regulate the life insurance business in India.
• LIC Act,1956
• Amendments to LICAct
Regulations Affecting General Insurance Business in India
The following Acts affect, circumscribe or regulate in some way or the other, some aspect of the 
General Insurance Business in India.
• General Insurance Nationalization Act,1972
• Amendments to GIN Act,1972
• Multi-Modal Transportation Act,1993
• Motor Vehicles Act.1988
• Inland Steam Vessels Amendment Act,1977
• Marine Insurance Act,1963
• Carriage of Goods by Sea Act,1925
• Merchant Shipping Act,1958
• Bill of Lading Act,1855
• Indian Ports (Major Ports) Act,1963
• Indian Railways Act,1989
• Carriers Act,1865
• Indian Post Office Act,1898
• Carriage by Air Act,1972
• Workmens' Compensation Act,1923
• ESI Act,1948
• Public Liability Insurance Act.1991
Why Regulation of Insurance Businesses is required?
Any industry wherein the stakes of the public are high would come within the purview of a 
Regulation – reason being that failure of such companies could result in serious implications on
the economy of the country at large. Insurance business involves collection of money from 
various Policyholders, investing them properly, honouring the obligations of the Policyholders 
and providing an efficient service. It is important to ensure that the entities providing these 
services stick to their commitments. Failure to honour commitments by such entities could have 
major repercussions on the financial services industry. After liberalisation and entrance of 
Private players in Insurance business and Seeing the large numbers of customers and high risk 
potential, Government of India constituted the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority 
in Year1999.
CONSTITUTION OF INSURANCE REGULATORY AND DEVELOPMENT 
AUTHORITY
The IRD Act has established the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (“IRDA” or 
“Authority”) as a statutory regulator to regulate and promote the insurance industry in India and 
to protect the interests of holders of insurance policies. The IRDA Act also carried out a series of 
amendments to the Act of1938 and conferred the powers of the Controller of Insurance on the 
IRDA. The members of the IRDA are appointed by the Central Government from amongst 
persons of ability, integrity and standing who have knowledge or experience in life insurance, 
general insurance, actuarial science, finance, economics, law, accountancy, administration etc. 
The Authority consists of a chairperson, not more than five whole-time members and not more 
than four part-time members. Every Chairperson and member of IRDA appointed shall hold 
office for a term of five years. However, Chairperson shall not hold office once he or she attains 
65 years while whole time members shall not hold office beyond 62 years. Central Government 
may remove any member from office if he or she is adjudged insolvent or is physically or 
mentally incapacitated or has been convicted of an offence involving moral turpitude or has 
acquired financial or other interests or has abused his position. Chairperson and the whole time 
members shall not for a period of two years from the date of cessation of office in IRDA, hold 
office as an employee with Central Government or any State Government or with any company 
in the insurancesector.
POWERS /FUNCTIONS OF IRDA Under Section 14 of the IRDA Act, IRDA has the 
following powers:
(a) Issue of Certificate of Registration to insurance companies, renew, modify, withdraw, 
suspend or cancel the certificate ofregistration
(b) Protection of interests of policyholders in matters concerning assignment of policies, 
nomination, insurable interest, claim settlement, surrender value and other terms and conditions 
of insurancecontract
(c) Specification of requisite qualifications, practical training and code of conduct for insurance 
agents andintermediaries
(d) Specification of code of conduct for surveyors and lossassessors
(e) Promoting efficiency in the conduct of insurancebusiness
(f) Promoting and regulating professional organizations connected with insurance and 
reinsurancebusiness
(g) Levying fees and other charges for carrying out the purposes of theAct
(h) Calling for information from or undertaking inspection of insurance companies, 
intermediaries and other oganisations connected with insurance business
(i) Control and regulation of rates, advantages, terms and conditions that may be offered by 
general insurancecompanies
(j) Specifying the form and manner in which books of account shall be maintained by insurance 
companies andintermediaries
(k) Regulation of investments of funds by insurancecompanies
(l) Regulation of maintenance of margin ofsolvency
(m) Adjudication of disputes between insurers and insurance intermediaries
(n) Supervising the functioning of Tariff AdvisoryCommittee
(o) Specifying the percentage of premium income of the insurer to finance schemes for 
promoting and regulating professionalorganizations
(p) Specifying the percentage of insurance business to be undertaken by insurers in rural or 
socialsectors
(q) Such other powers as may beprescribed.
Powers of IRDA with reference to control of management of insurance companies, takeover of 
management, mergers, acquisitions and winding up Section 52A empowers IRDA to make a 
report to Central Government if the affairs of a Life insurance Company are carried on in any
manner prejudicial to the interests of policyholders.
Based on the Report, the Central Government is empowered to appoint an Administrator to 
manage the affairs of the life insurance company.
A report shall be filed by such Administrator to the Central Government giving his 
recommendations on the way forward, including the options of transfer of business to an existing 
insurer or winding up, as he deems fit.
Central Government is empowered to take such action as it deems fit based on the Report of the 
Administrator.
Section 52H empowers Central Government to acquire the undertaking of any insurer based on 
a report from IRDA on failure to comply with directions or if the insurance company is being 
managed in a manner detrimental to the public interest or in the interests of public or 
policyholders it is appropriate to doso.
Central Government may make a scheme for transfer of undertaking of the insurer to another 
insurer in such cases and decide the appropriate compensation in such cases.
The Central Government may constitute a Tribunal comprising of a Chairman ( a person who is 
or has been a Judge of the Supreme Court or a High Court) and two other members (one of 
whom has experience in insurance and the other a Chartered Accountant) for thispurpose.
Section 53 empowers the Tribunal to order for winding up in accordance with the Companies 
Act, 1956, if based on a petition presented by shareholders holding not less than one-tenth of the 
whole body of shareholders and holding not less than one-tenth of the whole share capital or by 
not less than fifty policyholders holding life insurance policies in force for not less than three
years of total value of not less than `50,000, the Tribunal is satisfied to do so. In addition, IRDA 
may also apply to the Tribunal for winding up on the following grounds:
(a) That the insurance company failed to deposit or keep deposited with Reserve Bank of India, 
the amount required to be deposited under Section 7 or Section98
(b) That the insurance company has failed to comply with any requirement of the Insurance Act 
or has continued contravention for a period of three months after notice of such failure or 
contravention has been conveyed to the Company byIRDA
(c) That it appears from returns or statements filed by the Company or from the results of the 
Company that the company is deemed to beinsolvent
(d) That the continuance of the company is prejudicial to the interests of the policyholders or to 
the public interestgenerally
It may be noted that Section 54 of the Act prohibits voluntary winding up of insurance 
companies, except for the purpose of effecting an amalgamation or reconstruction of the 
company or on the ground that by reason of its liabilities it cannot continue its business. This 
provision overrides the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956 on this point. An appeal against 
the Tribunal formed under the Insurance Act shall lie with the National Company Law Appellate 
Tribunal
Opening of places of business requires prior approval of IRDA Section 64VC requires every 
insurance company to take a approval in advance in IRDA for opening any place of business or 
for relocation of an existing place of business outside the same city, town or village. The 
approval is required to be sought for opening of any offices, whether called as Branch office, 
Head Office, Administrative office, Satellite office or any other similarnames.
Powers of IRDA for imposition of penalties for default in complying with the Act (Section 102) 
Section 102 empowers IRDA to impose a penalty not exceeding Rupees five lakhs for each of 
the following failures by an insurancecompany:
(a) Failure to furnish any document, statement, account, return or report toIRDA
(b) Failure to comply with the directions (Section 34 empowers IRDA to issue directions if it is 
satisfied to do so in the interests of public or for prevention of affairs being conducted 
detrimental to policyholders or to secure proper management of anyinsurer)
(c) Failure to maintain the required solvencymargin
(d) Failure to comply with the directions on the insurance treaties Further Section 105B 
empowers IRDA to impose a penalty not exceeding Rupees Five lakhs for failure to comply with 
Section 32B, while Section 105C empowers IRDA to impose a penalty not exceeding Rupees 
Twenty five lakhs for failure to comply with Section 32C, with cancellation of certificate of 
registration for continuingfailure.
Regulation/Guidelines relating to Licensing Audit and Supervisions of Insurance 
Companies Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (Registration of Indian Insurance 
Companies) Regulations, 2000, contains the provisions relating to licensing of Insurance 
companies in India. These provisions have been amended from time to time and provide detailed 
guidelines for registration as Insurance Company in
India. For supervising the operations of Insurance Companies in India, IRDA has issued various 
guidelines from time to time and discussed under relevant chapters. As per the Insurance 
Regulatory and Development Authority (Registration of Indian Insurance Companies) 
Regulations, 2000 (as amended), every entity wishes to work as an Insurance Company needs to 
apply with IRDA in the prescribed format.
IRDA (Licensing of Insurance Agents) Regulations, 2000 & IRDA (Licensing of Corporate 
Agents), 2002
These Regulations provide for the conditions of licensing for individual insurance agents under 
Section 42. The Regulations cover the following:
(a) Prescription of application for IRDA licensing along with the feesrequired
(b) Prescription of minimum qualifications for becoming an insurance agent – 12th standard or 
equivalentexaminationiftheAgentresidesatplaceswithpopulationof5,000ormoreasper
census and a pass in the 10th standard or equivalent examination for candidates residing in any 
other place
(c) Practical training requirements from an approved training institution for 50 hours covering 
various insurance subjects. Further, the training hours for an agent who is going for a composite 
licence – i.e. one life and one non-life licence, the training requirement is 75 hours Where the 
applicant possesses professional qualifications such as membership of the Institute of Chartered 
Accountants, Cost an Works Accountant or Company Secretaries, Actuaries or an MBA, the 
number of training hours is reduced to25.
(d) Pre-recruitment examinations to be conducted by the Insurance Institute ofIndia
(e) Prescription of codes of conduct for Agents In the case of Corporate Agents, i.e. where the 
entity licensed as an agent is a Company or firm, it must have at the minimum a Corporate 
Insurance Executive and Specified Persons who are employees of the Corporate Agent entity and 
who will have to possess minimum qualifications, undergo the practical training and pass the 
examination conducted by the Insurance Institute of India. A licenceissued under these 
Regulations is valid for a period of 3 years after which it shall be renewed for continued 
eligibility for Agents to solicit or procure insurance business. Insurance Surveyors and Loss 
Assessors (Licensing, Professional Requirements and Code of Conduct) Regulations, 2000, 
Insurance Surveyors and Loss Assessors (Licensing, Professional Requirements and Code of 
Conduct) Regulations, 2000, as amended by, Insurance Surveyors and Loss Assessors 
(Licensing, Professional Requirements and Code of Conduct) (Amendment) Regulations, 2013 
contains provisions relating to registration, regulation and supervision of Insurance and loss 
surveyors in India. Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (Health Insurance) 
Regulations, 2013 Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (Health Insurance) 
Regulations, 2013 contains the provisions relating to registration and other requirement relating 
to third party administrator inIndia.
IRDA (SCHEME OF AMALGAMATION AND TRANSFER OF LIFE INSURANCE 
BUSINESS) REGULATIONS, 2013 AND IRDA (SCHEME OF AMALGAMATION AND 
TRANSFER OF GENERAL INSURANCE BUSINESS REGULATIONS, 2011)
Under the provisions of the Act, a Scheme of amalgamation or transfer is possible only between 
two life insurance companies or two general insurance companies, It is not possible for a life 
insurance company to be acquired by a general insurance company or vice versa, since separate 
insurance companies are required to be formed for transacting life and general insurance 
businesses.
The Regulations require submission of every proposal for implementation of proposed 
amalgamation to be submitted to IRDA for a prior approval along with the draft Scheme of 
amalgamation. However, before submission of the application, notice of intention to submit the 
application shall be submitted one month before filing the application for approval for every 
proposal for implementation as above along with a statement on the nature of amalgamation or 
transfer along with the following documents:
(a) Draft of the agreement for the proposed amalgamation ortransfer
(b) BalanceSheetsofboththetargetinsurancecompanyandtheacquiringinsurancecompany
(c) Financial Condition Report. Solvency Statements and Incurred but not Reported(IBNR)
Report of both the insurance companies
(d) Report by an Independent Actuary (who has not been connected with any of the two 
insurance companies during the past 3 years) on the proposed amalgamation ortransfer
(e) Executive summary of the proposed amalgamation or transfer along with the terms on which 
the transaction has beencontemplated
(f) Report on the manner in which the interests of Policyholders will be protected and the 
compliance with the applicable laws including the Competition Act, 2002 The financial 
statements shall be prepared as on the appointed date, i.e. date fixed for the purpose of giving 
effect to the scheme of amalgamation or transfer and IRDA may cause an independent actuarial 
valuation of the insurance businesses of the transacting parties. IRDA would then consider issue 
of an in-principle approval for the proposed amalgamation ortransfer.
Upon receipt of the in-principle approval, the transacting parties shall inform their respective 
Policyholders about the proposed Scheme of amalgamation or transfer as follows:
(a) Keeping the Scheme open for inspection for Policyholders at the Headoffice;
(b) Uploading the Scheme in the website of the transactingparties;
(c) Statement on nature and terms of amalgamation to be published in one leading National and 
one vernacular Newspaper and filing copies withIRDA;
(d) Informing all the Policyholders individually giving notice about the application for the 
proposed amalgamation or transfer. Upon receipt of the in-principle approval from IRDA, the 
transacting parties would seek other legal clearances or regulatory approvals, including the 
following: (a) Filing of the Scheme of arrangement, along with the in-principle approval of 
IRDA, before the relevant Court or Tribunal for confirmation of the Scheme of arrangement 
under Sections 391 to 394 of the Companies Act, 1956; (b) Filing applications before the Foreign 
Investments Promotion Board or Reserve Bank of India for seeking necessary approvals; (c) If 
the insurance companies have a foreign insurance company as a promoter who is regulated in 
their country of origin, necessary regulatory approvals for the proposed Scheme from the 
concerned regulator. (d) Such other approvals, including the approval of Securities and Exchange 
Board of India or the Competition Commission ofIndia.
Upon receipt of all the legal clearances or other regulatory approvals, the transacting parties shall 
submit all the other approvals to IRDA for seeking their final approval. A final approval is then 
considered by IRDA keeping in mind the stipulations laid down by the Court/Tribunal and other 
regulatory authorities and the following considerations:
(a) compliance with the solvency margin requirements after the proposedtransfer
(b) compliance with other applicablelaws
(c) protection of interests ofPolicyholders
(d) orderly growth of the insurance industry and shall accordingly grant the finalapproval.
Upon receipt of final approval from IRDA, the following are the consequences:
(a) The scheme of amalgamation and transfer shall take effect from such date as may be 
specified by IRDA while granting the finalapproval;
b) The final approval shall be binding on all Policyholders, Creditors or employees of both the 
transacting parties;
(c) The assets and liabilities of the transferor insurer shall vest with the transferee insurer from 
the effective date oftransfer;
(d) Publication in one national and one vernacular newspaper confirming completion of the 
process of amalgamation or transfer. In respect of amalgamation or transfer completed between 
two life insurance companies, the transferee insurer shall file a certified true copy of the scheme, 
deed or agreement under which the amalgamation or transfer has been effected along with a 
declaration from the Chairman and the Principal Officer listing down the various payments made 
or to be made to any person on account of the amalgamation or transfereffected
IRDA GUIDELINES FOR GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL In order to enforce timely redressal 
of Customer grievance, the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA) has issued 
guidelines for grievance redressal by insurance companies. A Grievance is defined as an 
expression of dissatisfaction by a customer on the action or inaction on the standard of service or 
deficiency of service of an insurance company or any intermediary and asks for remedial action. 
It is distinguished from inquiry or a request which is seeking information or requesting for a 
service and are not considered as Grievances. Every insurance company shall have a designated 
senior officer at the level of CEO or Compliance Officer of the Company as the Grievance 
Officer. Further every office of the insurer shall also have a designated Grievance officer for 
suchoffice.
The process for handing a Grievance is as follows:
(a) Every grievance shall be acknowledged within 3 working days of receipt of grievance, 
containing the name and designation of the person who will deal with thegrievance
(b) The Grievance redressal procedure including the time taken for resolution of disputes shall 
be mentioned in theacknowledgement
(c) Normally a Grievance shall be resolved within 3 days. However, where it is not possible to 
resolve within 3 days, the insurer shall resolve the complaint within 2 weeks and shall send a 
final letter ofresolution
(d) Where a complaint is rejected, the reasons shall be clearly stated alongwith the recourse 
available if the customer is stilldissatisfied
(e) Further if the insurer shall inform the customer that if the customer does not come back 
within 8 weeks from the date of providing resolution, the grievance shall be treated asclosed
(f) A grievance can be closed only if the following conditions aresatisfied:
1. Where the insurance company has acceded to customer’s grievance, upon acceding to the 
request of thecustomer
2. Where the insurance company rejects the customer’s grievance, upon receipt of a 
communication from customer accepting the company’sresolution
3. Where the insurance company rejects the customer’s grievance and the customer does not 
respond within 8 weeks of receipt of resolution, upon completion of the 8weeks
4. In all the above instances, the Grievance Redressal Officer shall certify that the Insurance 
company has discharged its contractual, statutory or regulatory obligations Every insurance 
company shall publish the Grievance Redressal Procedure in the website of the insurance 
company. The Policyholders Protection Committee of the Insurance Company shall receive 
reports concerning Grievances and shall monitor the process of handlinggrievances.
IRDA (Obligations of Insurers to Rural and Social Sectors) Regulations, 2000 (as amended 
from time to time) IRDA (Obligations of Insurers to Rural and Social Sectors) Regulations, 2000 
provides that every insurance company is required to undertake a minimum percentage of 
business providing insurance coverage to persons residing in rural areas and providing coverage 
to persons who are engaged in social sector. Rural areas have been defined as those places which 
have been classified as rural areas as per the latest census. The obligations of insurers under 
Rural Sector is calculated as a percentage of the total number of policies sold by an insurance 
company and is dependent on the age of the insurance company as follows: For a life insurance 
company, the percentage with 7% (2%) in the first financial year of operations, increases to 12% 
(5%) in third financial year and 16%(5%) in the fifth financial year and 20% (7%) in the tenth 
financial year. Note: figures in brackets indicate obligations of general insurance companies. In 
respect of Social sector, the obligation is in terms of number of Lives assured covered under an 
Insurance policy belonging to social sector occupations as defined in the Regulations. The 
number of lives required to be covered under this sector is also dependent on the age of the 
insurance company as follows: For both Life and General insurance companies, the numberof
lives to be covered increases from 5,000 lives in the first financial year to 20,000 lives in the fifth 
financial year and 55,000 lives in the tenth financial year Social Sector is defined unorganised 
sector, informal sector, economically vulnerable or backward classes and other categories of 
persons, both in rural and urban areas.
IRDA (Micro Insurance) Regulations, 2005 A micro insurance products is designed to meet 
the needs of persons, especially residing in rural areas, whose primary requirement is basic 
insurance coverages in life, such as payment of insurance benefit upon death of the bread winner, 
to the family or Health insurance etc. The intention is provide a low cost product to such persons. 
A life micro insurance product is therefore a pure term insurance product, or an endowment 
assurance product or a health insurance product with or without accident benefit. A general 
micro insurance product includes health insurance, insurance coverage on huts, livestock, tools 
or instruments or any personal accident contract. Minimum and maximum amount of sum 
assured have been prescribed for each product category under Schedule I and Schedule II to the 
Regulations. For any of the product categories the sum assured cannot be less than `5,000 or 
more than `50,000. A Non Governmental Organisation or a Self Help Group or a Micro Finance 
Institution or a Non-profit organisation (Companies registered under Section 25 of the 
Companies Act, 1956) can be appointed by an insurer to act as a Micro Insurance Agent.
The Regulations provide for a tie up between a Life insurance company and a General insurance 
company for offering both life and general micro insurance products together to a customer. A 
micro insurance product may be distributed by a licensed agent or an insurance broker, but a 
Micro insurance agent is prohibited from distributing any insurance product other than micro 
insurance products. 
A micro insurance agent is allowed to act as an agent for micro insurance products of one life 
insurance company and one general insurance company at a time by entering into an agreement 
with them. The insurers concerned shall impart 25 hours training on micro insurance products, 
customer service, claims etc. to the Micro insurance agents. 
A micro insurance agent shall appoint Specified persons who are authorised to sell on behalf of 
the Micro insurance agent (who can be a NGO or SHG or MFI as above) All insurance 
companies are expected to issue polices in vernacular language to facilitate customer 
understanding of the policy terms and conditions. Where it is not possible a write up in 
vernacular language must be attached with the policy document. A micro insurance agent may be 
paid a remuneration not exceeding10% for single premium sreceived,20%(15%for general
insurance companies)for
the premiums received during all policy years. All micro insurance products sold shall be 
reckoned for the purpose of social sector obligations of an insurance company. Where the micro 
insurance product is also sold in a rural area, it shall be counted both for rural and social sector 
obligations separately. Exposure draft to Micro Insurance (Modification) Regulations On 
comprehensively examining the existing business model adopted under Micro Insurance vis-avis the extant regulations on Micro Insurance,
IRDA proposed to review the IRDA (Micro Insurance) Regulations, 2005. Accordingly, an 
exposure draft on Micro Insurance (Modification) Regulations was issued in July, 2012 for 
further and wider deliberations on the subject. As on August, 2013, the modified rules are yet to 
be published by IRDA. 
IRDA GUIDELINES TO FINANCIAL INCLUSION Insurance Regulatory & Development 
Authority (IRDA) has been making immense efforts to educate and Regulatory Environment –
Specific Legislations 83 empowers the common citizens about insurance industry in India and 
their rights & responsibilities. IRDA has been at the forefront of insurance sector deepening, 
protecting the rights of policyholders, regulating insurance companies & advisors and bringing 
about insurance inclusion in India for all segments esp. the poor.
Some of the steps taken by IRDA for financial inclusion include
1. National Strategy for Financial Education the Insurance Regulatory and Development 
Authority (IRDA) has released the draft National Strategy for Financial Education for comments 
and feedback in Year 2012. The final strategy is yet to be notified by the IRDA. The National 
Strategy recognises that financial literacy and financial education play a vital role in financial 
inclusion and inclusive growth and envisages ways towards creating awareness and educating 
consumers on access to financial services, availability of various types of products and their 
features; changing attitudes to translate knowledge into responsible financial behaviour; and 
making consumers of financial services understand their rights and obligations. The National 
Strategy seeks to create a financially aware and empowered India. It aims at undertaking a 
massive Financial Education campaign to help people manage money more effectively to 
achieve financial well being by accessing appropriate financial products and services through 
regulated entities with fair and transparent machinery for consumer protection and grievance 
redressal.
2. Website on Insurance Education In an attempt to increase insurance awareness levels across 
the country, the authority has taken a number of consumer education initiatives and has recently 
launched an exclusive insurance education website www.policyholder.gov.in This website has 
self-explanatory menus and gives information in simple language on topics such as: • Buying 
insurance
• Making aclaim
• Policyholder Protection and Grievance Redressal
• Handbooks in 13languages
• Do’s and Don’ts for apolicyholder
• Comic series • Consumer Affairs AnnualBooklets
3. Grant of Corporate Agency license to Department of Postal To promote financial inclusion, 
insurance regulator Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA) has granted 
corporate agency license to the Department of Post for distributing insuranceproducts.
4. Emphasis on educating insurance agents to weed out mis-selling India’s Insurance Regulatory 
and Development Authority (IRDA) has been chalking out an ambitious plan to combat misselling, a menace that has been haunting the industry for about a decade now, especially after the 
emergence of equity-oriented insurance products. During fiscal year 2012, the regulatorreceived
1 lakh complaints on mis-selling. IRDA has been emphasizing specialized training to the 
country’s 2.5 million insurance agents after they clear the basic examination to qualify as a 
licensed agent to sell insurance products. The training, aimed at instilling seriousness among 
insurance agents about sales as a career and stop unfairly selling insurance schemes just to earn 
commissions.
IRDA REGULATION RELATING TO PRODUCTS APPROVAL An insurance company
cannot launch any product unless the product specifications are filed with IRDA and are 
approved by them. This procedure is popularly called “file and use” procedure under the IRDA 
Regulations. This procedure is required to be followed whenever a new product is launched or 
whenever an existing product is withdrawn or modified. IRDA have recently issued the
following two Regulations, subsuming all the existing notifications with reference to Product 
design:
(a) IRDA (Non-Linked Insurance Products) Regulations,2013
(b) IRDA (Linked Insurance Products) Regulations, 2013 A linked life insurance product is one 
which combines the benefit of insurance coverage and investment in one product. Under this 
type of product, the balance amount available after appropriation of charges, including the 
mortality charges, in invested in market linked investments. For example, investment in listed 
equities or bonds. The Policyholder, in addition to providing the fundamental risk coverage, a 
linked insurance product also provides an investment management service and the value of 
investment is reflected in the form of Net asset value from time to time. The risk on the 
investment portion lies with the Policyholders. A non-linked life insurance product, on the other 
hand, does not provide the investment management service on behalf of the policyholders. 
Typically, the following are the benefits under a non-linked insuranceproduct:
(a) Covers risk of mortality – i.e. risk of dying early – provides sum assured on death, e.g. Term 
insurance policies or whole life insurance policies which provide sum assured only ondeath
(b) sum assured which can be provided on survival to the maturity of the policy, e.g. Endowment 
Policies which provide for sum assured on death or on maturity whichever isearlier
(c) Annuity contracts, which covers the risk of living longer, by providing periodic payments as 
long as the policyholder isalive
(d) Health insurance contracts, which cover the risk of hospitalization (General insurance 
companies also offer health insurance contracts on indemnitybasis)
(e) Rider benefits e.g. Accident Death Benefit rider (where an additional sum assured is paid on 
death due toaccident)
Consumer Disputes Redressal Agencies
(a) District Consumer Disputes Redressal Forum established by the State Government in each 
district of the State. The State Government may establish more than one District Forum in a 
district. It is a district level court that deals with cases valuing upto Rs.20 lakhs. 
(b) State Consumer Disputes Redressal Forum established by the State Government takes up 
cases valuing less than Rs.1 Crore. 
(c) National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission established by the Central Government , 
which works as a national level Court and deals with amounts more than Rs.1 Crore. None of 
the above fora can entertain a complaint unless it is filed within two years from the date on 
which the cause of action had arisen. Notwithstanding the above, a complaint may be 
entertained after the period of two years, if the complainant satisfies the concerned forum that he 
had sufficient cause for not filing the complaint within such period and the reason for 
condonation of the delay is recorded by the concerned forum. 
Filing of complaints A complaint may be filed by the consumer to whom the goods are sold or 
services are provided. Any recognised consumer association One or more consumers with same 
interest The central government or state government Power of Civil Court to District Forum The 
District Forum shall have the powers of Civil Court while trying a suit in respect of the 
following matters: 
(a) The summoning and enforcing attendance of any defendant or witness and examining the 
witness on oath 
(b) The discovery and production of any document or other material object producible as 
evidence. 
(c) The reception of evidence on affidavit 
(d) The requisition of the report of the concerned analysis or test from the appropriate laboratory 
of from any other relevant source. 
(e) Any other matter which may be prescribed. Relief to the Complainant If the complaint is 
proved the Forum shall order to remove defect pointed out by the appropriate laboratory from 
the goods in question or to replace the goods with new goods of similar description which shall 
be free from any defect or to return to the complainant the price, or, as the case may be, the 
charges paid by the complainant or to pay such amount as may be awarded by it as 
compensation to the consumer for any loss or injury suffered by the consumer due to negligence 
of the opposite party or to remove the defect in goods or deficiency in the services in question. 
The following relief may be provided to the Complainants: 
(a) to discontinue the unfair trade practice or the restrictive trade practice or not to repeat them; 
(b) not to offer hazardous goods for sale; 
(c) to withdraw the hazardous goods from being offered for sale;
(d) to cease manufacture of hazardous goods and to desist from offering services which are 
hazardous in nature; 
(e) to pay such sum as may be determined by it, if it is of the opinion that loss or injury has been 
suffered by a large number of consumers who are not identifiable conveniently; 
(f) to issue corrective advertisements to neutralise the effect of misleading advertisement at the 
cost of the opposite party responsible for issuing such misleading advertisement; 
(g) to provide for adequate cost to parties. Appeal An appeal shall be filed within thirty days. 
Delay in filing appeal may be condoned if there is sufficient cause. 
Limitation Period 
Limitation period shall apply within two years from the date on which the cause of action has 
arisen. 1. Redressal of Public Grievances Rules, 1998 The main objective of these Rules is to 
provide for a speedy redressal of certain grievances specific to insurance sector. This is an 
alternative dispute resolution mechanism which is managed by insurance companies to solve the 
disputes arising within the industry. The Governing Body of the Insurance council shall consist 
of representatives of each of the insurance companies, which shall ordinarily be the Chairman or 
the Managing Director or one of the Directors of the insurance companies. 
Ombudsman 
The Governing body shall appoint one or more persons as Ombudsman for the purpose of 
resolving insurance disputes. Persons eligible to be appointed as Insurance Ombudsmen Only 
the following persons shall be eligible to be appointed as Insurance Ombudsmen: 
(a) Persons who served in the capacity of Chairman or Managing Director in Public Sector 
Insurance Companies 
(b) Persons who have served the Indian Administrative Service or the Indian Revenue Service 
(c) Persons who are retired Judges of the Supreme Court or the High Courts An Ombudsman 
shall be appointed by the Governing body from a panel prepared by a Committee comprising of: 
(a) Chairman, IRDA 
(b) Two representatives of Insurance council including one each from Life Insurance business 
and from General Insurance respectively 
(c) One representative of Central Government 
Term of office and Remuneration of Ombudsmen
An Ombudsman shall serve for a term of three years and shall be eligible for reappointment. 
However, an Ombudsman shall not hold office after he or she attains the age of 65. The 
Ombudsman shall be paid a salary of `80,000 per month and any pension to which he is entitled 
from Central Government or Statement Government or any other organization or institution 
shall be deducted from his salary.
Powers of Ombudsman 
An Ombudsman is empowered to entertain the following disputes:
(a) A complaint as specified under Rule 13 
(b) Partial or total repudiation of claims by an insurer 
(c) Dispute with regard to the premium paid or payable in terms of the policy 
(d) Dispute on the legal construction of policies with regard to claims
(e) Delay in settlement of claims 
(f) Non-issuance of any insurance document to customers after receipt of premium Procedure 
for making a complaint Any person who has a grievance against the insurer may himself or 
through the legal heirs make a complaint in writing to the Ombudsman within whose 
jurisdiction the branch or office of the insurer complained against is located. The Complaint 
shall be in writing duly signed by the complainant or through his legal heirs and shall state 
clearly the name and address of the complainant, the name of the branch or office of the insurer 
against which the complaint is made, the fact giving rise to the complaint, supported by the 
documents, if any, relied on by the complainant, the nature and extent of the loss caused to the 
complainant and the relief sought from the Ombudsman.
In order that a complaint is entertained before the Ombudsman, the following conditions must 
be satisfied:
(a) The complainant must have first exhausted the remedies available within the insurance 
company for settling the grievance and approach the Ombudsman only if either the insurance 
company rejects the grievance or complainant not satisfied with the reply or the insurer fails to 
respond within one month of submission of the grievance
(b) No complaint can be preferred before the Ombudsman after one year from the date of 
rejection or final letter from the insurance company on the representation made by the 
complainant 
(c) If the complainant has not preferred alternative legal remedies and the proceedings are not 
pending before any Court or Consumer forum Recommendations by the Ombudsman After 
hearing both the parties and the submissions made, the Ombudsman can make his 
recommendations on the case. Copies of recommendations shall be sent to the complainant and 
the insurance company concerned. Such recommendation shall be made not later than one 
month from the date of receipt of the complaint. If the complainant accepts the recommendation, 
a copy of the acceptance is communicated to the insurance company concerned. The insurer 
shall comply with the terms of recommendation not later than 15 days of receipt of the 
recommendation. Award Where the complaint is not settled by agreement, the Ombudsman 
shall pass an Award which shall be in writing shall state the amount awarded to the 
complainant. The amount of compensation shall not grant an award exceeding `20 lakhs 
(including ex-gratia and other expenses) All Awards shall be passed within 3 months of receipt 
of the complaint and issue a copy of the Award to both the insurer and complainant. The 
complainant shall furnish to the insurer within a period of one month of date of receipt of the 
award, a letter of acceptance that the award is in full and final settlement of the claim. 
Thereafter, the insurer shall comply with the award within 15 days of receipt of the acceptance 
letter and shall intimate the compliance to the Ombudsman. 
Policyholder litigations before Insurance Ombudsman, Mumbai
As per the Annual Report for 2012-13 published by the Office of the Insurance Ombudsman, 
Mumbai, out of the total number of 131 entertainable complaints received against life insurance 
companies, 63 complaints pertained to partial or total repudiation of claims, 53 towards non 
issuance of Policy document to customers and 14 pertained to delay in settlement of complaints. 
In respect of General insurance companies, as per the above Report, out of the total number of 
1,477 entertainable complaints, 1,328 complaints were regarding partial or total repudiation of 
claims and 71 were regarding disputes with regard to the premiums paid or payable in terms of 
the policy.
SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT STUDIES
UNIT – 5 –INSURANCE MANAGEMENT – SBAA1505
UNIT 5 INSURANCE CUSTOMERS
Individual and Corporate Insurance Customers – Nature of Insurance Customers, Mind set as to 
Insurance – Investment or Risk Management – Compulsion Vs. Voluntarism – Ethical Behaviour – Risk 
Management Attitude, Avoidance, Prevention, Reduction, Retention or Transfer – Factors influencing 
Policyholder Satisfaction – Retention of Customers by Insurers.
Individual Insurance Customer
Individual Insurance is a health policy that you can purchase for just yourself or for your family. Individual policies are also called 
personal health plans. The person one who buys policies for his/her personal use is said to be as Individual Insurance Customers.
Corporate Insurance Customers
A Corporate insurance may be defined as a type of insurance which can be used by large organizations to cover up various 
operational risks such as theft, financial losses, employees’ health benefits and accidents. Such an insurance plan is also 
known as business insurance and it is of great benefit for the officers who are involved or were involved with the company 
and obviously for the company itself. In this regard, it should be noted that the protection has certain limits. The officials of 
the company are held responsible for any personal actions which will not be covered by this insurance.
Types of Corporate Insurance
Corporate Insurance is a provision through which organizations can cover their losses. They are
(a) Property Insurance – In case the property of an organization gets damaged by incidents such as natural calamity, fire, 
workers unrest, vandalism etc., and property insurance can help cover the losses. Some Inusrance plans cover all types of 
incidents with an exception of very few ones under their all-risk policies. On the other hand, there is another type of property 
insurance that is known as peril specific policies which provide financial cover only for those losses that are listed in the
policy.
(b) Professional Liability Insurance: This type of insurance is also called Errors and Omission Insurance and protects the 
business formal types of negligence claims and certain mistakes. It differs from one industry to another and is addressed 
through an industry specific customized policy. This type of corporate insurance is mandatory for any organization that deals 
with accounting, finance, consulting, healthcare, law and practice.
(c)Workers’ Compensation Insurance – A company should add workers compensation insurance in its insurance; is the 
moment its first employees is hired. It covers the medical treatment expenses of the employee and provides compensation in
case of death or disability of the employee while he/she is working for the company.
(d) Group Health Insurance – One of the most important corporate insurance. Group Health Insurance offers healthcare 
benefits to a group of people i.e. the employees of an organization. Generally this insurance plan is uniform in nature and 
offers the same benefits to all the members of the group.
(e)Product Liability Insurance – If you have a business which manufactures products for mass consumption in the general 
market, then you should definitely have Product Liability Insurance. Even if the manufacturer is sure that the products are 
flawless and safe, you ever know if the product will end up causing damage to someone. Thus the best option to protect a 
manufacturing business is with the help of this specific type of corporate insurance.
(f) Business Interruption Insurance: There are likely to be incidents when certain events and occurrences can interrupt the 
normal course of your business. This insurance will help cover up the losses one faces in this interruption period. Business 
interruption insurance is the best for a retail store or for the type of business in which one needs a physical endpoint to get in 
touch with the customers. 
Nature of Insurance Customers
1. They are in control – with the price transparency created by aggregators, lots of new entrants to the market and the 
ease of swapping providers, the insurer is now at the consumer’s beck and call
2. They are well educated – with the ease of online pre-purchase research and the plethora of alternative information 
sources such as blogs and social media about insurance products available, there is not the same level of need for 
brokers and financial advisers as previously
3. High experience expectations – they are used to the personalised, consistent, easy and often fun experience offered 
by the data giants of the day (online and retail industries in particular) and these expectations transfer to their 
insurance provider
4. They expect authenticity – any communication must be relevant, personalised and engaging, for example Aviva’s 
Drive app encourages good driving and delivers personalised scores for premium discounts, rather than 
communicating for the sake of it.
Mindset as to Insurance 
As insurers try to transform themselves and stay competitive amid this dynamic environment, there are six distinct levers 
that determine the success of these efforts. These six levers constitute the six dimensions of what we might call the Insurance 
Cube, to understand the buyers’ mindset. The first three faces of the cube are trends in technology, regulations, and business 
models. The other three are factors such as speed, efficiency and risk.
(a) Regulatory Compliance - Insurance industry regulations change often and compliance is mandatory. For instance, there 
are regulations such as CCPA and GDPR for data privacy and security; accounting standards such as IFRS and GAAP.
Insurance providers need to be extremely vigilant in adhering to the strict guidelines imposed by these regulations in order to 
be compliant.
(b)Technology Readiness -The right technology can put an organization ahead by enabling it to derive distinct competitive 
advantage. An organization that uses an Open Source API or micro services can potentially be more flexible, robust, and 
agile with more autonomous teams that can deliver change quickly. Technologies such as cloud, IoT, and Block chain can 
greatly enhance operations and enable the organization to provide highly differentiated customer experiences with 
sophisticated digital capabilities.
(c) Business Models -Given changing consumer demands as well as an evolving technology landscape, insurance companies 
need to constantly re-invent themselves by exploring new business models. Whether it is adoption of a new value chain or 
delivering new-age “phygital” (physical + digital) experiences, companies need to think like disruptors. The disruption may 
not be just in the immediate industry but could also be a cross-industry disruption. For example, lot of the insurance carriers 
is moving away from agent-based physical selling to phigital selling.
(d) Risk -Every business has to deal with a certain number of risks such as location risks, market risks, concentration risks 
etc., and insurance is no different. Given the fast pace of change, companies might also face certain talent risks or the risk of 
technology debt. Each of the risks listed above has the potential to snowball into a major issue that could threaten the 
organization’s survival. Given this, the ability to mitigate risks and prepare back-up plans is key to survival for insurance 
players.
(e) Efficiency- Running a highly efficient business is a huge operational advantage for insurance companies. Efficiency, 
whether it is cost efficiency or operational efficiency, can be achieved in a number of ways such as through cost takeout by 
rebadging existing deals. Automation is an important tool to increase operational efficiency. On the people front, building a
futuristic workforce by enabling people with the right tools, data, and training can help to greatly increase productivity and 
efficiency. Leveraging ecosystem partnerships can help streamline processes and make the organization more efficient. For 
instance, a leading international reinsurance and insurance group was keen to bring in efficiencies through new age 
technologies to help achieve cost optimization.
(f) Speed - In a competitive environment, the speed at which a company responds to change matters. Quick product 
introductions provide a first mover advantage. Similarly, it is important that timeline-based market commitments are 
honored. Distributed agile adoption can help greatly speed up response times for insurance companies.
While each of these factors is definitely interconnected, evaluating a company on each of these separately can provide a 
useful framework to determine competitive readiness. It can also be a useful guide to help determine strategies for the future.
Investment of Risk Management
Risk management is the process of identification, analysis, and acceptance or mitigation of uncertainty 
in investment decisions. Risk is inseparable from return in the investment world. ... Alpha is a measure of excess return; 
money managers who employ active strategies to beat the market are subject to alpha risk.
Principles of Investment Risk 
(a) Prediction is Very Difficult - Especially if it’s About the Future Asset management firms are paid to make predictions, and every 
prediction has a margin of error. Investment risk management seeks to understand these margins of error and to use this understanding to 
aid the decision-making process in the presence of uncertainty
(b) Investing is Not a Game - Over even longer periods than the decades since 1900, history indicates that virtually all financial markets 
ultimately do not survive. Even over periods where financial markets were continuously in operation, the rules governing these markets 
were in constant flux. Investing in financial markets is not a game in which the rules are clearly specified and known in advance.
(c) Clarity is Imperative - There is a separation of duties between investment managers and their clients. It is rare that a client will hire 
an investment manager and place no constraints on investment activities. Typically, some part of the capital markets will be specified: a 
mutual fund might be required to invest in US small cap growth equities; a sovereign wealth fund might hire a manager to put money to 
work in the European credit markets. The investment manager must clearly indicate which risks it will take and which risks it will not. 
The client must understand which decisions the manager is making and which decisions the manager is leaving to the client.
Compulsion Vs.Voluntarism
What are Deductibles in Car Insurance?
Deductible is part of the claim and is to be paid by the policyholder before the insurance company takes the 
responsibility of the remaining claim.
Types of Deductibles :
Deductibles are of two types:
a) Compulsory Deductible in Car Insurance- The compulsory deductible amount is fixed by the insurer and has to be 
paid compulsorily by the policyholder whenever any claim arises. As per IRDAI, the amount of Compulsory Deductible 
for four-wheelers less than and equal to 1500cc is Rs.1000 and Greater than 1500cc is Rs.2000. The insurer may charge 
a higher deductible if the car is older and presents a larger risk of claim or for cars with higher cubic capacities or in 
other circumstances where the risk of claim is perceived to be higher. There is no lowering of pr emium for compulsory 
deductibles and premium is calculated taking into consideration other factors such as IDV, make and model.
b) Voluntary Deductible In Car Insurance - This is the limit chosen by the policyholder to meet a part of the claim 
from his own pocket before raising it to the insurer. The amount depends on the policyholder who chooses the limit 
factoring in his affordability and risk. Choosing a higher amount of Voluntary Deductible causes a lowering in 
premiums through discounts.
Difference between Compulsory Deductible and Voluntary Deductible
Compulsory Deductible Voluntary Deductible
It is compulsorily fixed by the insurers This is chosen by the policyholder and is not mandatory
The level of compulsory deductible has no effect on the 
premium rate
Higher the level of Voluntary Deductible, lower is the 
premium rate
In case of claim, only the compulsory deductible level 
needs to be paid which is low
In case of claim, the policyholder has to pay both the 
compulsory deductible part and the voluntary deductible 
chosen, the total of which is higher
Ethical behavior in insurance
Ethical Issue in insurance Business Currently there is high level of market indiscipline going on in insurance business. In the 
pursuit of the operators in this market to get their own share from the market, they engage in all sorts of unethical practices 
such as; rate cutting, thrashing basic facts that policy holders should know from them. They are more concerned in the 
premium they will get from the insured and not in carrying risk which is supposed to be the primary objective. 
One of the legal principles that bind insurance business is that every insured should contribute equitably to the insurance pool 
in proportion to the risk they are bringing into the pool. One of the standards is being misplaced since clients are charged 
different rates for the same risk. Another implication of this is that it leaves little reserve in the hand of underwriters after 
removing running cost of the policies and management expenses. And this in turn makes it very difficult for underwriters to 
meet their major obligation which is claims settlement. Unluckily this has led to loss of greater percentage of the industry’s 
revenue and as result poor performance of this business due to under – pricing of its products and services. 
Ethics play key role in making trust and a good relationship, doing things in the right way that it should be done. A lot of 
insurance companies in India urge ethics but they do not act it. The mindset of businessmen as “business is business” has 
done lot of harm to their business. It has rendered them to be irresponsible and personally insensitive. Players in this market 
are supposed to put themselves in the shoes of their customers and should work with empathy. The nature of insurance 
business has to do with trust between them and their clients. In this case ethics in insurance business can be measured in 
terms of the standards on which insurance transactions are based. 
Below are mentioned some of the challenging issues found in Insurance sector:
a) Premium Collection issues: This is another challenge identified to be affecting this business in India. These 
intermediaries are the distributing channels that stand between the insured and insurers. It has been reported that insurance
brokers and agents are fund of collecting premium from insured and not remitting to insurance companies. These people use 
premium for other things and quickly run to remit when claim occur and if claim does not occur they refuse to remit the 
premium.
b) Problem of solvency: Cash flow problem is a confrontation to insurance business in India. It can be said that these sectors 
live from hand to mouth. Based on this investors are chased away from this market as no one is ready to embark on an 
investment that will not be viable. 
c) Lack of Standards: It has been observed that there is lack of standard for this business in India, despite the fact that there 
are recognized regulating bodies. Every player in this market act the way they like and want without observing the laid down 
protocols. The standard kept in place for the operation of this business has long been misplaced.
d) Poor Attitude of Government The government does not encourage insurance practitioners. Over the years they have not 
been able to release any relevant incentive to the operators into this business. The failure of government to inject fund into 
this business has made it impossible for them to attract investors as they cannot pay dividend not to talk of declaring bonus to 
shareholders.
e) Poor Management A sizeable number of practitioners managing insurance business both the top management and low 
level management are under – qualified. They are not competent enough to manage this business. And this has really done a 
great harm to the business as insurance business itself is a technical business and should not be handled by just anybody but 
the right people, these are people that have passion and vision for the business not just those that pop in to see what is 
happening. 
f) Lack of Integrity and Trust Successful insurance companies evolve around trust which is absent. The major if not the 
only reason of insured taking up an insurance policy is to have their claims settled should in case of mishap. The image of 
insurance company can simply be determined by their ability and attitudes to claims settlement.
Challenges for personnel in claims administration; 
• long procedure involved in processing claims 
• fraudulent aspect of the insured’s
• inadequate human resources 
• inadequate material resources 
• circumstantial determinism 
• relationship management 
• lack of understanding of insurance terms by and conditions by insured’s
• bad negotiation by distributing channels
• inflexibility in the part of supervisors 
• insincerity on the part of repairers
• logistics problem 
• inability of insured’s to produce documents to process their claims 
• Delay in remitting premium by insurance brokers
• Untimely notification of renewal notice to insured’s by underwriters 
• Cash flow issue
Ethical issues are found common in insurance business.
1. Failure in identifying the customer's needs and recommend products and services that meet their needs. 
2. Conflicts between personal benefits and proper performance of employees responsibilities 
3. Unethical remarks about competitors, their products, or their employees or agents 
4. Lack of expertise or skills to competently perform one's duties 
5. Misrepresenting in terms and conditions while selling products to customers. 
6. Failure to provide prompt, honest responses to customer inquiries and requests 
7. Failure to provide products and services of the highest quality in the eyes of the customer
8. Conflicts of interest involving business or financial relationships with customers, suppliers or competitors
9. Failure to identify the customer's needs and recommend products and services that meet those needs. 
10. Misrepresenting or concealing limitations in one's abilities to provide services. 
11. Failure to provide prompt, honest responses to customer inquiries and requests.
Unethical Insurance Practices
(a) Failure to communicate- An insurance company may fail to notify you when it makes a decision regarding your 
insurance, or the company may fail to return your calls or emails after an accident.
(b) Delaying settlement-Similarly, an insurance provider may delay your claim for settlement without a justifiable cause. 
Often, providers hope they can delay the settlement until you either forget or give up on your personal injury case.
(c)Unreasonable demands-In connection with delaying settlement, an insurance company may make unreasonable demands 
meant to stall the settlement process, such as asking you for an unreasonable number of documents and claiming the process 
cannot begin until the company receives all these documents. If you fail to meet these demands, the insurance company may 
deny your claim.
(d)Changing or cancelling the insurance policy-An insurance company may make sudden changes to its policy in response 
to a claim you filed, making it impossible for your claim to go through. Often, companies will cite the new policy as a reason 
to deny your claim. In other cases, a company may cancel the policy altogether after you try to file a claim.
(e)Unethical investigating-In investigating your claim, the insurance company may use unethical or even illegal methods. 
Sometimes the company may fail to properly investigate your claim, or simply refuse to investigate at all and tell you your 
claim is denied.
(f) Withholding policy information -Your insurance company should disclose the entire policy to you, including any policy 
limits. Withholding information or refusing to inform clients of policy limits constitutes an unethical insurance practice.
(g) Conflict of interest -When an insurance adjustor tries to handle both your claim and the claim from the other party, a 
conflict of interest necessarily arises. This conflict of interest may lead to the insurance company receiving money from the
other party in exchange for helping them, which means the company will shortchange you in favor of the other party.
(h) Unreasonably low settlements - If an insurance company offers you a settlement that seems unreasonably low, you may 
be a victim of an unethical insurance practice. In this case, you should wait to accept the offer until you have consulted an 
attorney.
(i) Threats-An insurance company may refuse to pay unless the client does something or doesn’t do something. This 
constitutes a threat, and is unethical.
(j) Restrictive definitions-In some cases, an insurance company may fail to pay the client because the situation does not 
meet the company’s set of criteria. For example, an insurance company may refuse to pay a client who has had a heart attack 
if the client’s medical condition does not meet the definition of a heart attack as laid out in the insurance company’s policy.
(k) Overcharging -Watch for agency fees or extra expenses that come in addition to the initial payment demanded by an 
insurance company, or expenses that are not specified in the quote given by the insurance company.
(l)Recognizing unethical insurance practices- To be on the safe side always demand a written quote from your insurance 
company for any transactions. This quote should include the name and contact information of the insurance company and 
agent or agency. If your insurance policy changes, you should receive an endorsement summary outlining the new policy. 
Likewise, after paying for a home or auto policy, you should receive a written declaration page and an ID card for your car 
insurance policy. Don’t pay for any additional fees that aren’t spelled out in the insurance quote, and don’t use a service (such 
as roofing, auto repair, etc.) you feel your insurance provider is pressuring you into using.
Insurance avoidance
Avoidance — a risk management technique whereby risk of loss is prevented in its entirety by not engaging in activities that 
present the risk. For example, a construction firm may decide not to take on environmental remediation projects to avoid the 
risks associated with this type of work.
Reduction mean in insurance
Reduction in coverage means a change made by the insurer which results in a removal of coverage, diminution in scope or 
less coverage, or the addition of an exclusion. Reduction in coverage does not include any change, reduction, or elimination 
of coverage made at the request of the insured.
Risk Retention
It is nothing than presuming that we are going to incur certain losses on a particular issue but at the same time are not willing 
to transfer such risks to another party. For example in an individual case a person’s decides to bear all the losses caused to his 
property by himself and never cares to get his property insured means all the risk shall be retrained by that particular
individual and in case of any eventuality he shall only be paying from his own pocket for the losses caused to his property.
Factors influencing Policyholder satisfaction
Insurance is a contract between the policy holder and the insurer such that the insurer company guarantees any event in the 
insurance range and in return, the policy holder should continuously pay a fee for the so-called insurance.Insurance services 
are in definition intangible and according to the declarations; they are promises and contracts held by a selling median to the 
customer which requires making trust between the seller and the customer from the initial point of the contract.
It is important to mention that service providers are very effective in the segments of selling insurance. They can examine the 
viewpoint of the customers about the goods and services of the company. Being confident about the quality of the quality 
offered in services for the insurance company is very critical leading to the surveillance of the company. In this respect 
insurance companies should predict special integrated plans for attracting the buyers and maintaining the existing policy 
holders so that they can increase customers' satisfaction to be able to proceed in the competitive world of today by presenting 
better/higher quality services. 
The penetration index of insurance in the commercial insurance segment of Iran is 1.02% being as much as 47.5% of the 
gross national product (GNP) in total social/commercial insurance segments. Services quality There should be an obvious 
concept of quality in order to understand the concept of one services quality. 
Quality is defined as preparedness of the services or goods for the user which requires design quality, accordance, 
accessibility and suitability of the location of presenting services. The international standards institute has defined "quality" 
as 'all of the properties/specifications of a product/service which have the ability of satisfying customers' need. Customers 
evaluate services quality by comparing what they expect/predict with what the services presenter practically offers. 
Therefore, services quality may be defined as the difference between customers' expectations from the services and their 
understanding of the real performance of the services.
Customers evaluate services quality from five various dimensions, that is, assurance, empathy, reliability, responsiveness and 
tangibility. There are various reasons which show why organizations should look for presenting higher-quality services to 
their customers some of which are: increasing customers’ expectations; competitors’ activities; environmental factors; easy 
access to the internet; the concept of services; and the difficulty of its understanding by the customers. 
Presenting better services to the customers, causes repeated shopping, extending word of mouth advertisements and the 
organization’s profitability .Customers evaluate service quality by comparing what they expect with what the service 
provider actually presents. Therefore, quality may be defined as the difference between customers’ expectations and their 
understanding of the actual performance of the company. 
Parasuraman et al. (1985) classified more than 200 features of service quality. These features were obtained via interviews 
with the customers of four different service departments, that is, banks, the organizations presenting credit cards, service 
companies of repair and Vazifehdust and Farokhian 2027 maintenance, and phone communications center. 
They presented a standard for evaluating service quality according to 10 potential factors by using these 200 features which 
are: 
(a) Tangible factors: Loans, appearance and the facilities of the provider such as staff's appearance and make up, 
equipment’s modernity, etc.
(b) Reliability: the extent which makes the services believable such as the organizations’ fame and validity, staff’s behavior, 
etc. 
(c) Responsiveness: The ability to reaching the complaints and improving the services in an effective manner. 
(d) Credibility: The ability of presenting services at the first time in a correct manner. 
(e) Competence: The ability of the staff to offer their information, knowledge and skills in presenting effective services. 
(f) Courtesy: Being respectful with friendly behavior to the customers. 
(8) Security: Lack of risk and doubt. 
(9) Availability: The ease of access and making relationships with the organization in order to solve the customers’ needs.
(10) Communications: Acknowledging the customers about how to present services such that they are understandable for 
the customers. 
(11)Understanding the Customers: The identification of customers’ needs/wants, paying special attention to them and 
knowing loyal customers.
Retention of Customers by Insurers
(a) Offer a solid product -This almost goes without saying, but it’s still absolutely crucial. It all starts with the products you 
offer. They must be helpful to your customers, otherwise, there’s little hope of retaining customers in the long term.
(b)Understand who your customers are and what drives them-You can’t think about retention until you know what’s 
important to your prospects and customers. Customer segmentation is the practice of categorizing customers according to 
common characteristics—e.g. price-sensitive customers, service-sensitive customers, etc. This is the bedrock of your agency: 
Your sales and marketing strategies will be built around your customers’ needs and expectations.
(c )Understand where your referrals come from - Referrals are an important part of customer retention because if a 
customer comes to your agency through through a referral, they have a much higher likelihood of staying with your agency 
long-term. This is also true for customers who refer others to you. Capitalize on this longevity by setting up a referral 
program that’s going to benefit your customers in the long run. (This will also benefit your business, of course.) This program
could be as simple as giving referrers a gift card or a percentage off their premiums. The most important thing about a referral 
program is that it should be “in the faces” of customers, so they know how they will benefit from providing referrals. Every 
communication your agency sends needs to highlight friend and family referrals, so it is always top-of-mind.
(d)Be an expert communicator - Stay in front of customers at all times to develop relationships with them. The most 
important aspect of communication with both customers and prospects is to have a cadence of regular communication 
through various methods of outreach: via phone, email, mail, text, etc.In that same vein, one of the biggest mistakes an agent 
can make in regard to communication is to sign on new customers without having an explicit process in place for contacting 
them. When this happens, you have no idea whether that customer is happy, dissatisfied, or on the verge of churning. It also 
gives other agents an opportunity to get in front your customers, and you risk losing their business. Other recommended 
methods of communication include:
Have annual or semi-annual meet-and-greets—this allows and even incentivizes people in the community to stop by 
your agency in person.
Survey customers about your agency’s services and products. There are a number of free survey tools available 
online, or it can be as simple as having your producers asks customers a few questions over the phone. This will help you 
address shortcomings and learn more about your customers, including how they feel about your pricing, products, and overall 
customer service.
(e)Focus on multi-lining customers signed into multiple products - People who have only one product offering from your 
agency are more likely to cancel than those who have multiple products. The more products you can get them signed onto, 
the more likely they are to stay with you. Have your producers dedicate a specific time block each week to focus on upsell 
opportunities. This way your agency’s offerings become much more “sticky,” helping increase your overall retention.
(f)Reduce lapsing cancellations by providing an autopay option-When customers forget to pay bills, their 
services/contracts are immediately cancelled—it’s a common cause of customer loss. Setting up an automatic payment option 
can help reducing lapsing. Consider offering discounts to encourage customers to sign up for autopay.
(g)Set expectations when onboarding customers -From the day a customer signs up, explain the benefits of sticking with 
you for the long-term. For example, set the expectation during on-boarding that customers will be incentivized when renewal 
time comes—such as a reduction of their deductibles after the first year. This way you’re greatly improving your chances that 
a customer will remain loyal, and potentially heading off rate shopping when that policy comes up for renewal. Another thing 
to mention when on-boarding customers is to share that, when it comes to claims, a more tenured customer may have an 
easier time through the claims process because they have a longer track record.